It was glitz and glamour on Sunday, November 10, 2019 at the Civic Centre, Victoria Island, Lagos on the occasion of Business Hallmark People of the Year Award, 2019. Business Hallmark People of the Year Award is an annual event organised by the medium to celebrate institutions and individuals who have affected national development in positive ways in the course of the year. Some of the notable winners of awards this year include, Anambra State governor, Chief Willie Obiano who emerged Hallmark Man of the Year; CEO  United Bank for Africa who was named  Banker of the Year; Chief Mike Ozekhome (SAN), winner of Professional Excellence Award in Law and Jurisprudence; CEO of Peace Mass Transit Limited, Chief Sam Maduka Onyishi, winner of the Business Integrity Award; Chief Bisi Olatilo, founder, Biscon TV, winner of Professional Excellence Award in Media and Communication; Group Head, Marketing and Corporate Communication, First Bank of Nigeria, Mrs. Folake Ani-Mumuney, winner of Professional Excellence Award in Marketing and Corporate Communication and Professor Olufemi Adelowo, Consultant Rheumatologist at LUTH, winner of Outstanding Achievement award in Medicine. Others are Air Peace Airline, Winner of Company of the Year Award; Sir Ifeanyi Atueyi, Publisher of Pharmanews, winner, Outstanding Achievement in Promotion of Pharmaceutical Industry; Mr. Collins Chikeluba, CEO, GMO Group, winner Entrepreneur of the Year Award; Fidelity Bank Plc., co-winner, Special Product of the Year; Sterling Bank H.E.A.R.T Initiative, co-winner, Special Product Award; Mr. Jackson Agbai Abbah, CEO, Dover Hotel, winner of Outstanding Achievement Award in the Promotion of Hotel and Hospitality; Mr. Abubakar Bello, MD NEXIM Bank, winner of Professional Excellence Award in Banking and Financial Services; Dr. Godwin Ehigiamusoe, MD, LAPO Microfinance Bank, winner Outstanding Achievement Award in Micro Financing; Mrs. Abike Dabiri-Erewa, Chairman of Nigerians in Diaspora Commission, winner Public Servant of the Year Award and NIMASA, winner of the Parastatal of the Year Award. 