By OLUSESAN LAOYE Prophet Solomon Akinkunmi Ajao of the Christ Apostolic Church, Warrior for Christ Mission Railway, Crossing Fagba in Lagos has noted that Nigeria is not moving forward because of deceitful attitude of men of God and politicians who, according to him, have failed to meet the yearnings and aspirations of people who put so much trust in them. The man of God who made the remark in a chat with Business Hallmark, said Nigeria has been moving in circles because those at the helm of affairs politically and spiritually are not honest. He emphasised that despite the trust of the people and the high expectations of them to deliver both politically and spiritually, politicians and the some clergy continue to deceive the people and run after materialism. He regretted that the love for material things have made many to stop bothering about the welfare of their congregations and the masses that elected them to serve. According to him, the attitude of these political and spiritual leaders have created high level of poverty which Nigerians are now passing through. Ajao warned politicians and men of God who are into deceiving people to desist or face the wrath of God. He pointed out that Nigeria’s journey to greatness is still far, as according to him, those in positions of power have turned the country to money-making venture and are looting the treasury with impunity. “These people have turned Nigeria to Sodom and Gommara by engaging in all sorts of immorality, kidnapping using human beings for rituals and looting,” he lamented. Ajao said although President Muhammadu Buhari has been doing what he can, given the circumstances, he is not the Messiah that would take Nigeria out of the woods. According to him, “Nigerians are now in bondage like the children of Israel.” He warned that if care is not taken, the man that would come to rule Nigeria after Buhari would show no sympathy to the people and would be worse than Buhari. He said that the only way out of the mess is for the leaders to organise a three day National prayer by both the Muslims and the Christians. He suggested that anyone, who one way or the other, is found to have been indicted for any form of corrupt practice should be banned from holding any public office, until he or she is finally cleared of corruption.