Financial analyst and monetary policy expert, Dr Boniface Chizea has lauded the winner of Business Hallmark Banker of the Year, 2019, Mr. Kennedy Uzoka, describing him as a consummate manager who has continued to steer the United Bank for Africa (UBA) in the right path. Chizea who spoke in a chat with our correspondent on Friday, noted that the UBA Managing Director has continued to steady the bank’s ship even in the turbulence sea that is the country’s economy. Pointing out that the award to Mr. Uzoka is well-deserved, Chizea noted that from the bank’s recent results, which according to him, show huge improvements, especially on the continent, it was obvious that the Managing Director has proved to be the ideal man for the job. “To a large extent, he has maintained the ship of UBA’s corporate governance. He has steadied the ship and it is moving smoothly in a water that is turbulent,” Chizea said. “That speaks to the fact that he is a good manager. It’s credit to the chairman (Mr. Tony Elumelu) who has an eye for excellent people. It’s obvious that the chairman is also pleased with him. “I see both of them together a lot of times. The bank’s results are looking up, which is also testament to the work he is doing. I give kudos to him. It’s an award well deserved.” Business Hallmark had fortnight ago, named Mr. Uzoka Banker of the Year in continuation of its tradition of honouring outstanding institutions and individuals who have affected national development in productive ways. Chairman, Hallmark Advisory Board, Professor George Obiozor and a member of the Board, Akogun (Dr.) Tola Adeniyi who announced the choice of the UBA MD in a press release noted that it was in “recognition of the consistent performance” of the Uzoka-led management team of UBA Plc in “setting a track record of profitability and wealth creation across its operations in the African continent.” According to the statement, “Our editorial Board was particularly impressed by the sterling performance of the bank in the international market, as one of Africas leading lenders. Your consistent promotion of financial inclusion across the African market can be rightly argued to have catalyzed action in the emergence of the African free trade agreement (AFCFTA) which was recently ratified by our country. “We also note with admiration, your successes in creating innovative financial products which broaden the traditional financial base. The UBA MarketPlace event which held in Abuja recently, has set new industry benchmarks.”