Last year December, Zenith Bank Plc, in line with the new industry rave of food and fashion shows, partnered with Fashion One, to launch its signature fashion exhibition – Zenith Fashion Fair – tagged ‘Style by Zenith.’ It was, by many accounts, a successful outing. This year, the bank says it is taking the initiative even further in a ‘mother of all fashion shows’ billed to hold at the Eko Atlantic city, Victoria Island this weekend. The maiden edition witnessed exhibitions by top designers, beauticians, beauty and lifestyle products manufacturers, accessory makers, food and confectionary, as well as performances by the likes of American Bobby Wilson and a number of local artistes who indeed set alight, the Open Ground by Four Points Hotel, Oniru, Victoria Island, Lagos, venue of the exhibition. Building on the success of the first outing, the bank will this weekend, kick off a second edition tagged “Style by Zenith 2.0” and scheduled to hold between Friday, November 29 and Sunday, December 1, 2019 at the Eko Energy City in the posh Eko Atlantic. The Fair promises to be a great avenue for SMEs to sell their products and expose their products to somewhat global audience free of charge, the only condition being ownership of Zenith Bank account. It’s been months in the making. Plan for the exhibition was first announced in an elaborate press conference in July. The bank says it’s planning, still in conjunction with Fashion One, a foremost international lifestyle and entertainment company through its Africa master licensee Virtual Xchange Ltd, is something really big. Lined up for participation are some of the world’s biggest names in the fashion industry, including Dolce and Gabbana, Tom Ford, Tokyo James, Eyola, Mai Atafo, Okunnoren Twins, Ejiro Amos-Tafiri, Telvin Nwafor, Fikirte Addis, House of Kaya, Gozen Green, Trish O, Chulaap, Agatha Moreno, Sunny Rose, Nonnistics, Caesar Couture, Yartel, Orapeleng Mdutle, Mustapha Hassanali and the Fabric Hub, among others. Besides the exhibitions, the programme will also see such other initiatives and events as the Aspire Music Festival, Aba Seminar Fair, Conferences and Seminars, Online Engagements and a special event for models. The idea, ultimately, the bank said, is to support creating value for customers by “focusing on various aspects of their lifestyle including fashion, beauty, food, entertainment, music, travel,” and so on.
Beyond serving as a veritable touch-point for creating value for customers, the fair is also aimed at providing opportunities for budding entrepreneurs and retail businesses to nurture and expand their businesses in line with Zenith’s retail focus. “This year, “Style by Zenith” takes things up a notch with the theme “Style the Life you Desire”, aimed at encouraging Nigerians to live their best lives and be extraordinary,” the bank said in a statement sent to our correspondents. “In addition to providing best-in-class financial solutions, Zenith Bank also seeks to be a reliable partner to our customers, ensuring that they excel on every front. With this edition, “Style by Zenith” continues in its commitment towards empowering individuals and entrepreneurs, helping people do what they know how to do best and repositioning them for greater levels of success.” For budding fashion designers, it will be a lifetime opportunity to learn from the veterans. Aside showcasing designs during the runway modeling sessions, the big names will also be participating in the various Lifestyle master-classes, offering expert opinions on recent trends and designs in the global fashion industry. General Manager of Zenith Bank Plc and Coordinator of the event, Mrs. Adobi Nwapa who spoke at the launch of the platform few days ago noted that: “Style by Zenith’ is a unique platform through which the bank will connect with and create value for its customers by focusing on various aspects of their lifestyle. It is an all-inclusive fair that seeks to engage and entertain both the young and old during this festive period.” Style by Zenith, she noted, “is geared towards engaging the Lifestyle ecosystem and connecting the consumers to every aspect of quality and affordable living, thereby helping them live their best lives in their own interest. “It is a holistic event aimed at connecting the SMEs and retail segment to a multiplicity of clientele through multiple factors which dictate and direct their everyday lifestyle choices ie; beauty, fashion, entertainment, food and general lifestyle (Travel, automobile, houses) thus facilitating the growth of the individual retail and SME businesses. “The crux of the ‘Style by Zenith’ campaign is the by-line… Live your best life. It is an aspirational call to people on all socio-economic strata of society, telling them they deserve and can indeed get, not just more, but the BEST QUALITY, out of life at affordable prices. “The fair will be multi-media and experiential as well, covering as much of human lifestyle existence as possible by taking advantage of all the product offerings by the exhibitors.” Established in 1990, Zenith Bank Plc. is Nigeria’s biggest bank by tier-1 capital. It provides corporate, business retail and personal banking products through its network of over 500 branches and business offices, serving millions of customers. 