Tragedy, yesterday struck in Kogi State following the declaration of governor Yahaya Bello of the All Progressives Congress (APC), winner of the state’s governorship election held on Saturday. A mob said to be loyal to the governor in the course of celebrating his victory, on Monday, invaded the home of a People’s Democratic Party (PDP) women leader, Mrs Salome Acheju Abuh, set it ablaze and burnt her to death. Mrs Abuh who was the women leader of Ochadamu ward in Ofu Local Government the state, had supported and campaigned for the PDP governorship candidate, Musa Wada prior to the election. The mob which apparently, did not like her decision to back the PDP candidate carried out by act as punishment. Reacting to the tragic incident, spokesman, Wada/Aro Campaign Council, Faruk Adejoh-Audu narrated: “Chanting GYB 4+4, the thugs, shooting sporadically, arrived Hon (Mrs) Abuh’s house at about 2pm this afternoon and surrounded the house, bolting every exit and escape from outside,’ he said. “They then poured petrol on the building and set it ablaze as other terrorized villagers watched from hiding. She reportedly attempted to escape through a window but was prevented by the metal burglary proof and gun shots with bullets raining in her direction. “The blood thirsty thugs waited, shooting and watching with relish while Mrs Abuh cried from inside the inferno until her voice died out. “They reportedly left only when the entire house and Mrs Abuh had been burnt to ashes. There are fears that the killing spree may escalate over the night. “We are calling on all men of good conscience to immediately help the people of Kogi State appeal to the Inspector General of Police to rein in Bello’s thugs and protect our people whose only crime was that they voted for their choice, a vote that was never allowed to count. “Unless Nigerians of Good conscience immediately come to our aid innocent people may die worse agonizing deaths as the blood lust of Mr Bello and his supporters continue. “So far there’s no indication that the Kogi State Police will arrest her killers or even prevent further attacks and killings of people.” Reports said the mob having made sure Mrs Abuh was dead, proceeded to burn houses of two other individuals who had supported the PDP in the election. They were, however, said to have been confronted by the youths in the community who made attempts to stop the rampage leading to serious fight in which many sustained knife injuries. The state police public relations officer, DSP William Ovye Aya who confirmed the incident to Business Hallmark, said the force had deployed men to the area to avoid further breakdown of law and order. “On 18/11/2019 at about 1630hrs, one Musa Etu of Ochadamu, Ofu LGA reported at the Station that, at about 1030 of same date, that there was a misunderstanding between one Awolu Zekeri aged 35, member of APC and one Gowon Simeon a member of PDP both of Ochadamu, and in the process Gowon Simeon stabbed Awolu Zekeri with a knife on his Lap, he died on his way to the Hospital,” Aya said. “As a result, angry Youths in the area mobilized to the house of one Simeon Abuh of same address who is an uncle to the suspect, set it a blazed, thereby burnt one Salome Abuh aged 60 years. Three other houses were equally burnt. The corpse has been moved to the University Teaching Hospital Mortuary Anyigba for Autopsy. “Meanwhile, the Police Mobile Force and Police Special Forces have been drafted to the area to prevent any breakdown of law and order. The investigation is ongoing.”