Anambra State governor, Chief Willie Obiano has inaugurated a 48-man think-tank to envision an economic and social development of the state in the next 50 years. Termed Vision 2070, Obiano said the plan was for the security, prosperity and happiness of the state’s people. The governor who inaugurated the high powered strategy committee, comprising former Central Bank of Nigeria governor, Professor Chukwuma Soludo, Mr. Patrick Okigbo 111, Engr. Chris Okoye among others, on Thursday, said it had become necessary to plan for the future of the state given the current global dynamics. He said the committee must develop an “Anambra Plan” that is robust and has a “broad ownership by the Anambra people and critical stakeholders.” The terms of reference of the committee, according to the governor, are as follows: To define the vision and mission of the state for the development plan;
To identify specific sectors that the plan will focus on;
To define broad objectives for each of the identified sectors;
To develop specific policies, programs and strategies aimed at attaining the vision over the 50-year period;
To categorize these specific strategies into short-term, medium-term and long-term plans/framework;
To define expected outcomes from the implementation of the strategies identified in the plan;
To develop a framework for measuring outcomes as stated in the plan;
To develop a holistic and result-oriented framework for funding requirements as well as funding sources for the development initiatives/programs of the state with milestones, time frames and critical success factors for each initiative;
To develop and implement a robust and widely consultative process in developing the Vision 2070 to ensure broad ownership by the Anambra people and critical stakeholders for its implementation. Membership of the committee is drawn from public and private sectors and include o Soludo who is to serve as chairman, Prof. Solo Chukwulobelu, Chief Primus Odili, Dr. (Mrs.) Uju Nwaogu, Prof. Kate Omenugha, Mr. Ifeatu Onejeme, Mr. Mark Okoye Jr., Mr. Okigbo 111 and Engr. Okoye. Also included are: Mr. Ben Akabueze, Captain Iheanacho Ebubeogu, Captain Okpagu, DIG Val Ntomchukwu, AIG Okey Ezike, Mr. Valentine Ozigbo, Mr. Maduka Emelife, Mr. Henry Manafa, Hon. Chudi Offodile, Dr. Ikem Odumodu, Chief Tony Onyima, Mr. Joe Anatune, Dr. Ndi Onuekwusi, Prof. Idemobi, Mrs. Nneka Ekwuozor and Mrs. Onwuamaegbu Ugwu. Others are: Prof. Uche Amazigo, Mr. Bryan Mezue, Dr. Uzochukwu Amakom, Engr. Emeka Eze, Mr. David Onyinyechi Agu, Dr. Olisa Agbakoba, SAN, Mr. Mac Atasie (Secretary), Amb. Emma Obi Okafor, Mr. Emma Onyilofor, Barr. Oscar Onwudiwe, Mr. C. Don Adinuba, Sir Charles Muoka, Mr. Chidi Nwafor, Mr. Chike Nwegbe, Mr. Emeka Okoli, Mr. Kenneth Onyemaka, Sen. Ikechukwu Obiora, Nze Uche Nwora, Dr. Ejimofor Opara, Mr. Chibuzor Ofobuike, Mr. David Anaeto and Mr. Nelson Omenugha. Responding on behalf of the committee, Prof. Soludo thanked Gov. Obiano for finding members of the committee worthy to carry out this important assignment. He charged the committee members to take the assignment as a call to duty adding that it is a privilege to be called upon to think and dream for the state. Given the calibre of people in the committee, Soludo expressed optimism and confidence that the committee will deliver “a robust, enduring and disruptive development plan for the state.” The committee was given nine months to deliver its report