CEO of West Africa’s leading airline, Air Peace, Chief Allen Onyema, has denied all fraud allegations by the US Department of Justice, clarifying that the charges are false and not in line with his character as a person and as a business man. The US Justice Department had in a statement on Friday, said Onyema has been charged with bank fraud and money laundering for allegedly moving more than $20 million from Nigeria through United States bank accounts in a scheme involving false documents based on the purchase of airplanes. The department also said the airline’s Chief of Administration and Finance, Ejiroghene Eghagha, is also been charged with bank fraud and committing aggravated identity theft in connection with the scheme. “Onyema allegedly leveraged his status as a prominent business leader and airline executive while using falsified documents to commit fraud,” U.S. Attorney Byung J. “BJay” Pak had alleged. “We will diligently protect the integrity our banking system from being corrupted by, even when they disguise themselves in a cloak of international business.” The department, however, noted that the indictment only contained charges and the accused remain innocent until proven otherwise by the court. “Members of the public are reminded that the indictment only contains charges. The defendants are presumed innocent of the charges and it will be the government’s burden to prove the defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt at trial.” In a statement on Saturday, nonetheless, Onyema stated that he never involved himself in any illegal dealings in the US or elsewhere. “As the press statement clearly stated, these are indictment that only contains charges. I am innocent of all charges and the US government will find no dirt on me because I have never conducted business with any illegalities,” he said. “Be rest assured that I also have my lawyers on this and these mere allegations will be refuted. I never laundered money in my life, neither have I committed bank fraud anywhere in the world. Every Kobo I transferred to the US for aircraft purchase went through the Central Bank of Nigeria LC regime and all were used for the same purpose. “The American companies that received the funds are still in business. I never took a penny from any US bank or Nigerian bank. I am willing to defend my innocence in the US courts,” Onyema emphasised.