Names of aides to Nigeria’s Vice President, Yemi Osinbajo sacked by President Muhammadu Buhari has been made public. The sides were relieved of their duties and consequently issued with their disengagement letters on Wednesday on the order of Buhari. They include, among others, former Oyo governor, Abiola Ajimobi’s daughter, Jibola Ajayi and Babajide Awolowo, the grandson of Obafemi Awolowo. The full list: 1. Jibola Ajayi – special adviser, legal
2. Lanre Osinbona – senior special assistant, ICT
3. Imeh Okon – senior special assistant, Infrastructure
4. Jide Awolowo – special adviser, oil and gas
5. Lilian Idiaghe- special adviser, research, legal and compliance
6. Arukino Umukoro – special adviser, Niger Delta
7. Bala Liman Mohammed – senior special assistant, Economy
8. Edobor Iyamu – senior special assistant, Niger Delta
9. Dolapo Bright – senior special assistant, agro allied value chain
10. Toyosi Onaolapo special adviser, community engagement
11. Gambo Manzo – special adviser, political
12. Bisi Ogungbemi – special adviser, political matters
13. Edirin Akemu – senior special assistant, industry, trade & investment
14. Akin Soetan senior technical assistant, economic matters
15. Aondaver Kuttuh – technical assistant, rule of law
16. Ife Adebayo – special adviser, innovation
17. Yussuf Ali – special adviser, power regulations
18. Tola Asekun – senior special assistant, National Boundary Commission
19. Morakinyo Beckley – special adviser, off grid power
20. Yosola Akinbi – senior special assistant, NEC
21. Tochi Nwachukwu – special adviser, power privatisation
22. Bode Gbore – senior special assistant, political
23. Abdulrahman Baffa Yola special adviser, political
24. Kolade Sofola – special adviser, infrastructure
25. Ebi Awosika – senior technical assistant, community engagement
26. Muyiwa Abiodun – senior special assistant, power
27. Forri Samson – Banu special adviser, entrepreneurship
28. Bege Bala – special adviser, BPE
29. Feyishayo Aina – senior special assistant, community engagement
30. Halima Bawa – special adviser, community engagement
31. Nkechi Chukwueke – special adviser, community engagement
32. Ilsa Essien – special adviser, media