…former minister, Fani-Kayode hits back The presidency has demanded that former president, Olusegun Obasanjo explain to Nigerians why he stayed away from the Democracy Day event held on June 12 at the Eagle Square, Abuja  despite being invited. Garba Shehu, spokesperson for President Muhammadu Buhari who made the demand in a post on his verified twitter handle @GarShehu, insisted that Obasanjo’s claim that he was not invited was untrue. “The former President, Chief Olusegun Obasanjo, owes an answer to Nigerians on his absence from the 2019 Presidential inauguration and Democracy Day celebration because the claim that he was not invited or he did not receive an invitation cannot be sustained,” Shehu said. “Since the claim was first made, elements in the polity that have deliberately and consistently been trying to lead the country toward polarization have cashed in on it, throwing all manner of rubbish at the Buhari Presidency. “The fact remains that the Secretary to the Government, Boss Mustapha wrote on May 16th, 2019 to: ‘His Excellency, Chief Olusegun Obasanjo, GCFR, Former President, Federal Republic of Nigeria, Agbe L’Oba House, Quarry Road, Ibara, (link: http://P.O.Box) P.O.Box 2286, Abeokuta, Ogun State.'” He said the investigation was sent to the former president’s “known forwarding address, detailing out all the major events, and the invitation cards were delivered by a reputable courier company as confirmed.” “The receipt of the letter and invitation cards as delivered by the courier company was confirmed by Mr. Taiwo Ojo, the long standing Personal Secretary to the former President. “If, in the circumstance, Chief Obasanjo did not see or receive the letter and invitation cards as published by Vanguard newspaper (Page 16, June 16, 2019) and several other news platforms, then the former President needs to find out what is happening with his own secretariat. The government office did its job diligently and should not be blemished for no reason.” Meanwhile, former Aviation Minister, Femi Fani-Kayode has asked the presidency to “stop whining” about Obasanjo’s absence at the event as according to him, it was a stolen mandate. “The Presidency should stop its whining about Baba Obasanjo’s failure to attend the Democracy Day celebration.They are behaving like a spoilt child that was stood up on its first date.Why would OBJ celebrate Democracy Day with an election-rigger and a tyrant who stole a mandate?” the former minister wrote on his twitter handle @realFFK “Why would ANY former Head of State or President attend? Apart from OBJ, @GEJonathan, Gen. Gowon, Gen. Babangida and Gen.Abdulsalami Abubakar ALL boycotted the event as did virtually the entire world. Doesn’t @MBuhari get the message? No-one regards you or takes you seriously!” The Buhari administration had on June 12 celebrated the country’s democracy day, having changed the date from May 29th in honour of the late Chief MKO Abiola.