President Muhammadu Buhari has announced the appointment of Mr. Mele Kolo Kyari as new Group Managing Director for the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) with effect from July 7, 2019. Kyari a geologist from the North East,  was Group General Manager, Crude Oil Marketing Division of and also doubled, since 13th May, 2018, as Nigeria’s National Representative to the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). He replaces Maikanti Baru. A statement by Ndu Ughamadu, head of NNPC public affairs department on Thursday, described Kyari as “a quintessential crude oil marketer with prerequisite certification and outfield pedigree in Petroleum Economics and crude oil and gas trading.” “In the last 27 years he had traversed the entire value chain of the Petroleum Industry, with exceptional records of performance. “Under his watch, the Crude Oil Marketing Division has recorded noticeable transformation in the management and sales of the various Nigeria’s crude oil grades via an infusion of transparency and automation of the processes.” Buhari has also appointed new Chief Operating Officers (COOs), including: 1. Mr. Roland Onoriode Ewubare (S/South) – COO Upstream
2. Engr. Mustapha Yinusa Yakubu (N/ Central) – COO Refining & Petrochemicals
3. Engr. Yusuf Usman (N/East) – COO, Gas & Power
4. Ms. Lawrencia Nwadiabuwa Ndupu (S/East), COO Ventures 5. Mr. Umar Isa Ajiya (N/West) – Chief Financial Officer 6. Engr. Adeyemi Adetunji (S/West) – COO, Downstream and 7. Mr. Farouk Garba Said (N/West) – COO, Corporate Services. The President directed that the New GMD and the newly appointed COOs work with the current occupiers of the various offices till 7th July, 2019 towards a smooth transition on 8thJuly 2019 when their appointments would take effect to ensure a smooth transition… However, the appointment of Mr. Farouk Garba Said (North West), who is replacing a retiring Chief Operating Officer, is effective from 28th June, 2019. The president also on Wednesday, extended the tenure of the Accountant General of the Federation, Mr Ahmed Idris. The announcement was made in a statement signed by the Director, Communications, Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation, Mrs Wunmi Ogunmosunle, on behalf of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation, Winifred Oyo-Ita. The statement said that Idris’ letter was signed by the Secretary to the Government of the Federation, Boss Mustapha. It said Idris was reappointed in accordance with Section 171 of the 1999 Constitution. “President Muhammadu Buhari has approved the renewal of the appointment of Mr Ahmed Idris for the second and final term of four years as Accountant General of the Federation in accordance with Section 171 of the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria (as amended).”