Nigeria’s president, Muhammadu Buhari has condemned in strong terms, the spate of attacks on the people of Kona ward in Jalingo local government area, Taraba state and demanded that security agencies take action to put an end to it. The president who stated this, in a statement by Garba Shehu, presidential spokesman on Wednesday, warned that attacks on innocent people in the name of revenge or whatever motives would not be tolerated by his administration. “No group of people has the right to surround innocent people and unleash murderous violence on them,” he said. According to him, resorting to self-help is an invitation to anarchy which in turn will make everyone unsafe. Buhari noted that in a cycle of violence, characterised by revenge and counter-revenge, there were no winners. He said that in a state of permanent hostilities, people undermined not only law and order, but also their own ability to conduct their everyday businesses in peace. “I always wonder how people can conduct their businesses in the absence of peace and tranquility because violence ruins everything and leaves the people worse off,” he said. “It is difficult to build a virile nation where hate and intolerance dominate the people’s minds. It is easier to destroy than to build. People should count the economic costs of this violence to their own lives.” He observed that a situation where community leaders abandon their responsibilities and allow thugs to set the agenda was dangerous for peace and security in the country. He criticised leaders “who publicly preach the virtues of peace, but privately promote hate and intolerance which ultimately culminate in violent destruction of life and property’’. In the past few days, Taraba has witnessed spate of violence following an invasion Janibanibu village, Jaingo by armed men. Many residents were displaced and Unspecified number killed after armed men set houses on fire on Monday. Consequently, Darius Ishaku, governor of the state, imposed a curfew on the state capital and other areas affected in an attempt to check the violence.