Vice President, Yemi Osinbajo has refuted claims by the General Secretary of Miyetti Allah Cattle Breeders Association of Nigeria, MACBAN, Baba Uthman Ngelzarma that his office is in charge of implementing the Ruga settlement initiative across the country. Senior Special Assistant to the Vice-President on Media and Publicity, Mr. Laolu Akande, clarified in a tweet on Friday that the programme being handled by Osinbajo was different from the one being referred to by Miyetti Allah. He said the National Livestock Transformation Plan, which had been endorsed by the National Economic Council (NEC) was different from the Ruga programme “Contrary to claims reported in sections of the media, Ruga settlements are not being supervised by the Office of the Vice President. Ruga is different from the National Livestock,” Akande tweeted. “On the National Livestock Transformation Plan, 13 States are already in the process of implementation of a plan to transform the livestock production system in Nigeria along market-oriented value chain while ensuring an atmosphere of peace and justice. “The states are Adamawa, Benue, Kaduna, Plateau, Nasarawa, Taraba, Zamfara, Katsina, Kano, Kogi, Kwara, Ondo, and Edo. These states are at different stages in the process but have indicated readiness to implement the plan. Truth is: this Federal Government will not impose on any state government regarding its land. “NEC okayed the plan based on the recommendation of a technical committee of the council chaired by Ebonyi State Governor Umahi. Other state governors who were on the committee and working group are Adamawa, Kaduna, Benue, Taraba, Edo, Plateau, Oyo and Zamfara-mostly the frontline states.” The MACBAN General Secretary, Baba Uthman Ngelzarma, had said on Channels TV Sunrise Daily that Osinbajo’s office was in charge of implementing the programme nationwide. “This Ruga settlement model is a component part of the livestock development and transformation plan that is being implemented under the Office of the Vice-President. It is a component part of it,” he has said earlier on Friday. “All must agree with me that the crisis we are facing today has become a multi-dimensional one and so the approach must also be holistic. It was the desire of the Federal Government to take a holistic approach that gave birth to the Ruga settlement model and it is not only for Fulani herders.”