BY SESAN LAOYE The new governor of Oyo State, Engineer Seyi Makinde, has said that he abolished school fees in all public primary and secondary  schools in the state to alleviate  the  problems of the  teaming  masses who have been finding it difficult  to pay. He said that in addition to that  he was donating his salary in the next four years for the  Teacher’s Pension’s Fund in the state, vowing to raise the standard of education in the state. Makinde, who was sworn in around 12: 25pm said with immediate effect, the N3,000 school fees for public secondary schools in the state is abolished. The oath of office was administered on the new governor by the Chief Judge of the State, justice Munta Abimbola. He however said for now,  the state government cannot afford to pay the new N30,000 minimum wage, adding that his government will need to dialogue with the labour leaders to chat the way forward in the state. Makinde further promised that for the best interest of the state, he was going to reach out to the governor of Osun State to decide the way forward for Ladoke Akintola University of Technology, Ogbomoso (LAUTECH). The new governor who faulted successive governments on neglect of the people with disabilities said he was going to pay attention to their health care, education, and possibly address their stigmatisation in the public. On the health sector, Makinde said in the first two years of his administration, no new healthcare centre will be built, but his focus will be on upgrading of the existing ones by renovating and equipping them. According to him, his government will reduce government overheads, increase the efficiency in tax collection, simplify the tax payment system and cut down on debt accumulation without concrete repayment plans. On the new minimum wage, Makinde said “Our plan is to make Oyo the first state to pay above the national minimum wage. We know this is possible. We have already set our plan in motion to make this possible. But, this requires time.  We propose staggered increments. I met with organised labour during my campaigns and made a pledge to an open relationship. I intend to stand by that promise. We will have a sincere conversation and arrive at the best possible decision. “We will set up committee in due course to look into all cases of those who believe they have been wrongly dismissed from the civil service, including those whose cases have been decided in their favour in court who have not been reinstated,” he said.