Becoming recognised as a “sustainable” organisation can enhance brand equity, unlock opportunities to create new markets and launch sub-brands, line extensions and packaging innovations. In the electronics industry, a number of companies are reinventing themselves with fresh initiatives and brand identities with a sustainability focus. Many have differentiated themselves by integrating sustainable thinking into the values and principles of their organisations, transforming all the functions that influence their brand and creating new opportunities in the process. Consumers want to do business with a company they can trust. Due to this, it is now common for a business to have a variety of external activities in place. In order to remain competitive in today’s market, one of the activities that businesses must practice is Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR). Those that don’t will be unable to attract or retain top talent, continue to experience decreased sales, and risk going viral for all the wrong reasons on social media leading to a damaged reputation. In the area of sponsorship and social support, LG Electronics has shown that it’s a dependable brand that is committed to social support. The South Korean brand is always looking to generate a positive idea of their products in the minds of their consumers. As such, the company regularly supports events that it feels can influence consumer opinions and bring a positive change in their lives. Also, the rise of social media has put a lot of attention to external activates of each company. In other words, public activities are a very important factor that can affect businesses, and the importance cannot be overemphasized. You will see a few examples in the following slides. According to Mr. Hari Elluru, Head of Corporate Marketing, LG Electronics, West Africa Operations, “As a global company, LG Electronics wants to use its capabilities to help local communities all over the world solving some of their regional issues.  For us, we believe that ‘Life’s Good’ when shared with others. We are committed to giving back to the society because we believe doing good is good business. “We have remained competitive while improving sustainability; we have enabled investment and innovation required to deploy new technologies and to safely and responsibly develop progressive products. LG Electronics will continue to support communities even in the future”, he said. Over the years, LG Electronics has vigorously pursued its CSR initiatives with all sense of responsibility and commitment, placing it at the forefront of giving back to society. The company recently inaugurated a free laundry service for the people of Ogba, Ikeja and its environs who are facing the difficulty of water and power to efficiently carry out their washing chores. The laundry cabin is equipped with state of the art facilities to effectively take care of the laundry needs of the people at free of cost. As a leading electronic giant, the company has also continued to create and donate some of its unique products to Nigerians. One of such innovation introduced was the Mosquito Away. LG’s Mosquito Away was purpose-built to stand up to Nigeria’s stifling heat and humidity, delivering powerful cooling performance and superior durability. Many health care centres, hospitals, orphanages, schools among others across the country have also benefited from LG’s donations to better the lives of the people. Such donations include its visit to Kuje General FCT, Abuja where it donated some units of All New Gencool Inverter Air Conditioners, Jet Cool Air Conditioners as well as Treated Mosquito Nets to the hospital; commitment to the welfare of children at the Lagos State Motherless babies home, Lekki etc Some other sustainability projects embarked upon by the brand include: scholarship awards to best engineering UNILAG students; visit to Idi-Ayunre community in Ibadan where they donated LG anti-mosquito Air conditioners as well as treated mosquito nets to the Health Centre, award of scholarship to outstanding Engineering students of the University of Lagos, beach cleaning activity to mark the world Environment Day where staff of the organization came together to clean an expansive beach in Ibeju-Lekki area of Lagos and many other activities like that. The brand has received accolades from Nigerian consumers over the years, for having their interest at heart in the development of cutting edge technological products embarked on this gesture in order to enhance health care delivery services in Nigeria. Internationally, LG Electronics has received several recognitions for its humanitarian services. Most notably, the United Nation Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) Award in 2013 under the Global Compact Local Network for its global social program, the LG Hope Series. The company has also declared unwavering support to address the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) focusing on the promotion of good health and well-being (goal 3); quality education (goal 4); clean water and sanitation (goal 6); affordable and clean Energy (goal 7); decent work and economic growth (goal 8). 