Union Bank recently held a series of training sessions for educators in Lagos, Abuja and Rivers as part of its initiatives to support the development of the education sector. Over 175 teachers attended the free workshops which were organised to upskill and equip them for more effective teaching. The classes covered modules on ‘Inspiring and Motivating Learners’ and ‘Developing Critical Thinking Skills’ among others, and were delivered by NFCR Educational Consultants. The Bank also organised conferences for Heads of schools in Lagos and Abuja where renowned educators spoke on the theme, ‘Leading Change in a Dynamic Environment’. Among the speakers were Mrs. Lai Koiki, Proprietor, Greensprings School; Dr. Femi Ogunsanya, Managing Director, Oxbridge College; Hajia Aisha Babangida, Board Member, El-Amin Schools; Mrs. Folasade Adefisayo, Principal Consultant, Leading Learning Limited and Mrs. Angela Ajala, Executive Director, Ladela Schools. The training sessions and conferences were organised on the platform of Union Bank’s education initiative – edu360, launched in October 2018 to promote collaboration and partnerships that will boost the development of education in Nigeria. The inaugural two-day edu360 event featured exhibitions, panel discussions and seminars that brought together investors, parents, school proprietors, teachers and students. During the event, over 200 teachers from private and government owned schools benefitted from free training workshops organised by the Bank. Speaking concerning Union Bank’s focus on education in Nigeria, the Head of Commercial Banking, Kunle Sonola said:
“Union Bank recognises the need for greater involvement of the private sector in education if we hope to achieve the level of growth and development we seek. We therefore designed edu360 as a holistic, multidimensional platform to engage the various stakeholders in the sector and facilitate much needed investments, capacity building for teachers and collaboration of parents and educators on child development and curriculum.”
The Bank will host the second edition of its annual edu360 event in October. The event will take place in Lagos and is expected to draw thousands of education stakeholders including government officials and regulators, educators, parents and students.
Union Bank remains committed to supporting Nigeria’s growth by identifying and investing in sectors that are vital to shaping a better, more sustainable future for generations to come.