The Presidency has welcomed the report by European Union Election Observation Mission to Nigeria for the March 2019 Presidential, National Assembly and Governorship elections which picked holes in the conduct of the 2019 polls, noting that the report did not question the results of the presidential election. Mallam Garba Shehu, spokesperson for President Muhammadu Buhari who stated this in a statement on Saturday, maintained that the report was “a clear indication of the administration’s good intentions and commitment to a pure democratic process.” He argued that the Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC) conducted a good election and will continue to improve on its processes and procedures. “The Presidency notes that the EU observers had been invited to the country by the Independent National Electoral Commission and welcomed by the government of President Muhammadu Buhari,” he said. “This was a clear indication of the administration’s good intentions, commitment to a pure democratic process, and desire to improve for the next elections. “The EU noted in their report that there were marked improvements from previous elections, although stating that more work needed to be done. “The administration of President Buhari will work with all Nigerian citizens, state institutions, parties, civil society, the media and other experts to make sure that the improvements recommended by the EU are implemented, and that these areas of concern are addressed. “It is noteworthy that INEC is in receipt of a number of recommendations that form a part of the EU report. “The Presidency assures that the Commission is in safe hands and happy that they are currently engaged in root and branch reviews of the 2019 general elections and will input lessons learned into its recommendations for electoral and constitutional reforms. “We believe that the commission conducted a good election and will continue to improve on its processes and procedures.” Shehu expressed regret that the elections witnessed violence in some places, but said it didn’t affect the overall outcome of the polls. “While it is regretted that the elections in a few parts of the country witnessed some violence, among other shortcomings highlighted by the EU, we note however that none of these hitches affected the overall outcome of the elections. “Thankfully, EU did not question the results of the presidential election. This is further proof that the polls reflected the overall will of Nigerians, and that the world is solidly behind the election of President Buhari for a second term. The EU observer mission had earlier on Saturday, released its final report on the 2019 election.
The European body had noted in the report that the process was not transparent, even as it said 150 people were killed in the process.