By OLUSESAN LAOYE As the South Western parts of Nigeria is determined to put an end to security challenges especially the recent spate of Fulani invasion, banditry and kidnapping in the region, their governors have said that they should be held responsible for any security lapses because they are now ready to fight and put an end to all forms of criminality collectively. This was the pedge the governors made during the two day security summit which took place in Ibadan on Tuesday and Wednesday last week The summit was summoned by the Development Agenda for Western Nigeria (DAWAN), through the six states of Lagos, Ogun, Oyo, Osun, Ekiti, and Ondo after their governors met in Abuja at the Ondo Governor’s Lodge and resolved to put an end to the security challenge which has created tension and fear among the people of the region. It was attended by all the six governors, namely Rotimi Akeredolu of Ondo who is the current Chairman of South West Governors Forum; Babajide Sanwoolu of Lagos, Seyi Makinde the host governor of Oyo, Kayode Fayemi of Ekiti who is also the current Chairman of the Governors Forum of Nigeria, Gboyega Oyetola, Osun and Dapo Abiodun of Ogun State. It was not the affairs of the governors alone, as it was also the gathering of all the stakeholders in the Yoruba agenda, which includes traditional rulers, various socio-cultural organisations like the Oodua Peoples’ Congress (OPC), the Agbekoyas, the police, the youth Organisations and security experts who delivered papers on security challenges and how to tackle them. All those who spoke including the Aare Onakakanfo of Yorubaland and the leader of the OPC, Aare Gani Adams agreed that all forms of atrocities that endanger lives should be regarded as criminality and be dealt with accordingly. Some even suggested that all the states in the South West should enact laws that would treat kidnapping, rape, and banditry as crimes to attract death penalty. The Oyo state governor Engineer Makinde who welcomed participants to the summit, said that terrorism is one of the issues ravaging the world and the activities of the perpetrators were not limited to the region alone but all parts of the country and that was why it must not be treated with levity. He warned that because the doors of the region is open to accommodate people it should not be abused and as such criminals would be dealt with according to the law. He said that because community policing is more effective than central policing, the entire region would want the creation of state police for effectiveness of adequate security in the country. He argued that community policing, should be the responsibilities of the state, local government and the traditional rulers who knows everything about their communities, saying that at this stage in Nigeria there should be collective ways of combating crimes. He said that for industrial growth and to attract investment, the South west region is determined to do everything to guarantee security, adding that this was the resolve of all the governors in the region. His counterpart from Ondo who is also the chairman of the governors in the South West, Akeredolu argued that the activities of the bandits have created palpable fear among the people of the south west which is now making nonsense of developments in the region because there was no way there would be progress amidst chaos. He pointed out that all the governors have resolved to push partisanship aside to work together as brothers to serve the people. He argued that south west is a unique region and they would not allow anything to jeopardise the collective interests of the people. He said that the governors in the six states of the region are determined to protect “our common interest and our people, the legacies of Yorubaland because we are a sophisticated race and as such, others are expected to learn from us” He went on, ” Yoruba people are accommodating; they are people who are ready to protect the weak and that is why our land is open to all but we would not want people to take that openness as weakness and advantage to create chaos, panic and fear among us.” He pointed out that with what is happening now there was the need to review the openness and hospitality as all the states in the region have decided that there would be no compromise in deploying all it takes including “our resources” to fight insecurity. According to him, the south west governors have decided to be proactive in fighting criminality, to eradicate the menace of drug abuse, murder, rape, kidnapping and other vices now rearing their heads in the region known to be very peaceful. He said that henceforth nobody would be spared for committing crime in the south west and warned those who think they can come to cause trouble and commit atrocities to note that the south west is ready for them and they would regret their actions. The governor said that the region now have policy objectives which transcends partisanship to ensure safety of the people, build economic integration of the region, peace, and to fight any external forces and aggressions. Dr. Kayode Fayemi of Ekiti said the people of the south west should not in anyway be tempted to play politics with the critical issues at stake saying that what people are experiencing now called for a total sober reflection, saying that there is now urgent need for our criminal justice to be reviewed to tackle the new scientific ways crimes are being committed in our society. He argued that he was saying it on behalf of the rest of them that they should be held accountable for any lapses in security in the region and their respective states. Governor of Lagos state Babajide Sanwoolu said the south west is now ready to intensify efforts in community policing using the example of vigilante group and Neighbourhood Watch system in Lagos state He said his government is committed to providing adequate security for the people. Governor Dapo Abiodun of Ogun State said one of challenges to be tacked is the porous borders in the south west which allow aliens to come into the country, saying that his state is one of the ones affected. He said that there should be proper ways of identifying illegal immigrants. Governor Oyetola of Osun State whose state is one of the states seriously affected by the Fulani invasion said that insecurity was a threat to the lives and livelihoods of the people as well as the economy of the region and that if not checked the Yoruba nation would be threatened like never before as this would erode livelihood. He said that if this happens the people of the region would be disillusioned and might resort to self defence, saying that this should be the right time to act to prevent anarchy but government can’t do it alone and there is need for collective wisdom and professional expertise to address the untoward situation. Also the Yoruba council of elders said they were happy that the region is now one and united to fight crime especially the invasion of the Fulanis. Both Chief Fasoranti and Dr Kunle Olajide said that the Yoruba elders are solidly behind the moves of the governors to tackle security challenges. Chief Fasoranti called Gani Adams as the Are Onakakanfo to rise up to the challenge of his position and ensure that the Yorubaland is protected from any invasion, adding that they are solidly behind him and any actions taken lawfully. Other organisations who were represented stated that they were ready to work with the governors to ensure that the south west is secured. Leaders of the Yoruba cultural group, Afenifere, which was the faction represented at the security summit, visited President Buhari at the meeting where they presented their demand for state police to curb the rising insecurity in the country. However, as the Abuja meeting, which also had Asiwaju Bola Tinubu, in attendance, was going on, the bandits struck in Oyo state, hijacking a commercial bus and kidnapping 10 of the passengers. This sparked so much outrage during for its affront and daring audacity to the people of the region after all the speeches and threats. Political observers believe that this matter may require a major confrontation with the bandits and herdsmen to settle.