The Yoruba Council of Youths Worldwide (YCYW) has lamented what it called “evil plan to tuncate” its forthcoming “Yoruba Security Summit” and ultimately “destroy its good objectives.” The Council which few weeks ago, gave ultimatum to militant herdsmen carrying out kidnapping, robbery and other crimes in the South West to leave the zone, said there is an ongoing attempt misrepresent its objective and truncate a Yoruba security summit it slated for June 27. “It has come to our notice that there is an ongoing misrepresentation and misinformation targeted at destroying our good objectives after our issuance of 7 Days Final Quite Notice against armed bandits, militant Fulani herdsmen and Boko Haram, and our subsequent convocation of the maiden Yoruba Economic Development, Peace and Security Summit slated for 27th June, 2019 at Mapo Hall,” a statement on Tuesday by the group’s president, Aremo Oladotun Hassan said. Hassan noted that since the group unveiled its plan to host the summit, it has been subjected to smear campaigns, blackmails and false accusations by individuals who do not wish Yoruba land well. He noted that the group’s efforts against Fulani armed bandits has continued to yield positive results, even as it is laying foundations for a paradigm shift and raising awareness amongst the people.
He observed that until recently, the carnage and the degrading of Yoruba institutions had gone on without anyone raising a finger, wondering why anyone would want to undermine their effort at this stage. “Before now, the Yoruba nation has been serially battered by these perpetrators of evil, while those who have degraded our institutions for personal gains at the expense of the masses are not being held to account. “Our education is comatose, we have various elements parading as leaders but they are only clogs on the wheels of our survival and growth,” he said. Hassan noted that it was unfortunate that since the ultimatum against violent herdsmen and bandits were issued, mischievous elements have been trying to misinterpret it as an attempt to harm ordinary Nigerians of Northern extraction in the zone, which he said is not the case. “The Yoruba Security Summit hopes to invite all stakeholders in the security sectors to be led by the leaders of the Yoruba Council of Elders, alongside President Muhamnadu Buhari as Special Guest of Honour, Professor Yemi Osinbajo and distinguished Royal Obas, stakeholders, youth leaders other expected participants and guest at the Security Summit are: the Inspector General of Police, all peace loving Nigerian stakeholders domiciled in Yoruba Land, NSA, DG DSS, Chief of Army Staff and other serving security chiefs, professionals, captains of industries, Governors and Legislative arms( both past and present ), while we hope to have in attendance Agbekoya, Olode local hunters and Vigilante Group of Nigeria to mention a few.” he said. “The summit is aimed at cross fertilizing ideas on the need to see security as our collective responsibility, in consonant with best standard practice on information and intelligence sharing. Hassan, however, restated the group’s resolve to ensure that the South West is rid of the scourge violent herdsmen. “In the recent days, we have witnessed rising waves of kidnapping, killings by Fulani armed bandits, hence our vigour to spur into a mass action protest and other strategic engagments with all necessary stakeholders, to be carried out simultaneously in all Southwestern states in the comings days. “Ativities shall be rolled out for campaign against terrorism in Yoruba Land. Total vacation of of all Armed bandits, kidnappers and ritualist in Yoruba Land is what we must achieve.