Rwandan President, Paul Kagame, has told President Muhammadu Buhari to focus more on the top in his anti corruption fight, just as he noted that the menace can be eradicated and tolerating it is a choice. Kagame who spoke at the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) summit in Abuja, called on Buhari and other African leaders to refocus their efforts and passion on creating value, wealth and should stop fighting corruption endlessly. “There is one of your own [Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala], who wrote a book, titled, Fighting Corruption is Dangerous; so she gave me the book, and as I was looking at the title, I reminded her and said you need to be thinking of writing another book to state that not fighting corruption is even more dangerous. “This is a fight that can be won; tolerating corruption is a choice, not an inevitability. It is within our power to end it. That is the most important starting point, otherwise, it will be a waste of time to keep talking about it.” He said Nigeria must share resources equitably, so everyone can join the fight against corruption, noting that African leaders must strive to add value, create wealth, while fighting corruption. “Corruptions does not take decades to eradicate once we decide to break the habit. “We have to set our sights high, it is not enough to fight corruption just as merely fighting poverty, it is too small an ambition for Africa. We want to create value, we want to create wealth, not merely fighting corruption.” Kagame congratulated Buhari on his reelection, noting that he is AU anti-corruption champion. “President Buhari, I wish to give you our very warm congratulations on your re-election and best wishes for the entire Nigerian people, on the road ahead,” he said. “I also want to mention here, that President Buhari is AU (African Union) champion in the fight against corruption, and we thank you.” The Rwandan president, however insisted that corruption must be fought from top to bottom, using four key principles, “culture, responsibility, accountability, and effectiveness”. “We must discard the myth that corruption is endemic to particular cultures. corruption is a universal weakness, not an African one, and it is not part of our destiny as a continent. He said research has shown that “the biggest sources and beneficiaries of corruptions are outside of Africa”.