...says APC belongs to Awolowo Nigeria’s vice president, Prof.Yemi Osinbajo has said it is untrue that the government of President Muhammadu Buhari has not met the expectations of Nigerians, as according him, Buhari inherited a debased economy from the immediate past administration of Dr Goodluck Jonathan in 2015. Osinbajo who spoke on Friday during the funeral service of Mrs Moroluke Fakoyede, mother of the Secretary to the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC), Mr Ola Olukoyede at Saint Luke’s Anglican Church, Ikere-Ekiti, Ekiti state, argued that the misdeeds of the Jonathan government had actually prevented some of the steps taken by President Buhari from manifesting on the wellbeing of poor Nigerians. He also alleged that there are ‘saboteurs’ working against the administration of President Muhammadu Buhari in the country. He said the ruling All Progressives Congress belongs to the late premier of the Western Region, Chief Obafemi Awolowo. “This country requires everybody to be on board to work hard. I belong to All Progressives Congress (APC), a party that belongs to Chief Obafemi Awolowo. It is not true that President Buhari does not know how to govern, it is not because we have not done enough. There are saboteurs and many fifth columnists working against us, but we are going to triumph,” he said. “The concern of President Buhari and APC and those of us in his government are for Nigeria to move forward and we shall achieve this. “All the good social investment programmes like tradermoni, the N-power and others will soon start to bear fruits and manifest. We are all going to benefit from Buhari’s administration.” The vice president praised the late Fakoyede for her honesty, saying her good deeds shall continue to bear good fruits in the lives of the children. Osinbajo’s assertion comes amid growing speculations that he being cut to seize by the president in view of the 2023 presidency. Buhari had last week, instructed the vice president to get clearance from him before taking decisions.