Bauchi State governor, Bala Mohammed, has disclosed that Fulani herdsmen from Chad, Niger and other neighbouring countries will benefit from the National Livestock Transformation Plan (NLTP) which is to be funded by Nigeria’s government. The governor who spoke on Channels TV Sunrise Daily on Monday, argued that since the herdsmen are nomadic, it would be inappropriate to deprive them from benefitting from the livestock plan just because they are not from Nigeria. “I think there is a lot of mistrust and misconception as regards the Fulani man. The Fulani man is a global or African person. He moves from The Gambia to Senegal and his nationality is Fulani,” the governor said. “As a person I may have my relations in Cameroon but they are also Fulani. I am a Fulani man from my maternal side, we will just have to take this as our own heritage, something that is African. So we cannot just close our borders and say the Fulani man is just a Nigerian. “In most cases, the crisis is precipitated by those outside Nigeria. When there is a reprisal, it is not the Fulani man within Nigeria that causes it. It is that culture of getting revenge which is embedded in the traditional Fulani man that attracts reprisal.” When asked if it was right to allow foreigners to benefit from Nigerian taxpayers’ money, the governor answered in the affirmative, insisting that the Fulani don’t actually have one single nationality since they are nomadic in nature. “We are already accommodating them. Do you delineate and really know who is not a Nigerian Fulani man? “They are all Nigerians because their identity, their citizenship is Nigerian even though they have relatives from all over the world. So, presumably they are Nigerians because they move all over and have relations all over. That is why our population in Nigeria is fluid.” The NLTP which was launched few days ago, will be 80 percent funded by the Federal Government while the states would provide 20 percent counterpart funding and the grazing land. Last week, governors of the 19 states of the North adopted the plan at a meeting in Kaduna. But Benue State insisted it would find out if it’s in tandem with the state’s grazing policy before adopting it.