Nigerians from all walks of life on Saturday, gathered at the Osun, Airport Hotel, Ikeja Lagos for a seminar on Stress and Dis-ease Management and Alternative medicine organized by T-Gold Health and Wellness Centre. The picture many people have in their head when they hear alternative medicine is one of uneducated people as practitioners. At this event, guests were educated by some of the best alternative medicine practitioners in Nigeria. Speakers at this event were Prof. Titi Oduye of Amelias Organics Limited, Dr Toyin Joshua from Simpe-bod Naturopathic Clinic and Dr Raymond Tade Toyo, physician at T-Gold Health and Wellness Centre. Raymond Toyo who was the host of the seminar, was of the view that stress is one of the major reasons many people fall ill is because of stress. He stated that there is a need for awareness on the need for people to get proper rest. He said, “We realized that the major health problems we have in this country are stress related. And many people don’t know the extent of what stress causes to the health, what damage stress can do to the health. They are not aware of that. You see people wake up around 4am and leave the house around 5am. They may not get back till 11pm. Hours in the traffic, mental stress, emotional stress, physical stress, people really don’t know what that would cause in the body. “We need to sanitize the people about the danger of stress and what it can cause in the body and how to manage the stress and whatever dis-ease that would emanate from stress, so that we have a better society. “There are so many people that what they need to do sometimes is just to relax. A lot of people don’t know the importance of sleep because they want to make money. They don’t know they have to sleep for a number of hours. “I have this patience that says ‘if I can sleep for three hours.’ How can you sleep for only three hours in 24 hours and expect to be fine? You can’t be fine.” Raymond Toyo further stated that his health centre has record success in treatment of many diseases. “We have been able to reverse cancer between stage 1 and 3. In that regard, we have many success stories. But when it is stage 4, we can’t assure you of reversal. Some people call T-Gold Health and Wellness Centre, Stroke Centre because of how efficient we are in the area of stroke. “In our field, we see high blood pressure as a symptom. In the orthodox medicine, they treat the symptom, while we treat the root Cause. We have also recorded success in kidney damage that has not parked up completely. When it comes to prostrate diseases, we have done very well. Our clients cut across the world” The next speaker was Prof. Titi Oduye. She has a BS.C Honours in Chemistry from the University of Lagos in 1982 and also a Masters in Chemistry from the same University. She delved into alternative medicine when he mother had stroke. She realized at the time that there was something more than orthodox medicine. She said “Stress is something that traumatizes your body. It is the root cause of many health problems. “We are spiritual beings having physical experience. If you do not take care of your health problem from above, you can’t fully solve the problem. If you are having any symptom, you have to tackle it from the root. For instance, if the symptom is headache, Paracetamol makes the symptom go away not what is causing headache. The orthodox medicine is just a mask. The problem will be remain. “Take for instance a car. If the engine of your car is faulty and you are not addressing that problem but just managing it with some by adding oil here and there, one day, the car may park up on the road.The same thing with the body. If you don’t address the root cause of what is causing pain and you just take analgesic, one day, the body will stop just like the car. For a car, you can change the engine or buy another car. Can you buy another body? “Stop looking for quick fix. There is none. “Don’t wait for cancer to start. Pay attention to your body. If you have cancer, it means that problem has been there for 10 or 15 years but you didn’t pay attention. You were probably taking pain killers.” “In Nigeria we stress ourselves with many things. Oh the government is not doing well this and that. Domestic problems also cause stress. In some homes, the wife would frustrate the man to the extent that he may want to jump into a lagoon. Women please stop comparing your husband with other man. If he is having financial problems, learn to support him. That is why you married him in the first place, to be his helper. “Stress could weaken the immune system and cause nutritional imbalance. Stress drains our energy.If you want to calm your nerves, it is better to take herbs than orthodox drugs. “Don’t let anyone run you ragged. Always be in charge. Remember when you are sick you may not get help, even from those who stress you. Learn to breathe properly when you are under stress. “Change your attitude. Eat well, change your environment away from generator noise and fume. ‘Expose yourself to a lot of sunlight because you need vitamin D for your immune system. Send our positive vibrations. If you send out negative vibrations it will come back to you. “As for eating fast food, we are digging our graves with and forks and knives. Too many chemicals are in fast food. You can go to a fast food restaurant once in a while. Do not make it a habit. Even on the few occasions you eat fats foods, make sure you detox when you get home. You could blend bitter leaf and drink.” The third speaker, Dr Toyin Joshua in a similar vein, gave some tips on how to manage stress. He said, “The first thing you need to help with stress is water. Natural water or alkaline water. You can add one lemon to about 150 cl of water and drink. “Women need to drink at least 300 cl of water in day, while men need at least 400cl of water in a day. “Bitter kola is also very good for the body. At least one quarter of it daily to calm you and make you feel good. “If you are stressed up and you can’t sleep, drink corn silk. Gather it and boil. Apart from reliving stress, it prevents prostrate problems in men. Plantain is also very good for the health. After boiling plantain with the peel, drink the waterm,” he expressed. There was also a session for testimonies. A few of the guests gave testimonies of how Dr. Raymond Toyo helped them health-wise. Some of them had life threatening ailments that were completely reversed. 69 year old Mazi Sony Allison spoke of how he took medication for High Blood Pressure for 20 years before he was introduced to T-Gold Health and Wellness Centre. He said, “I was out on BP medication for life. My doctor told me to take it for ever. For 20 years, I was on it before I met Raymond. “I 2014 opticians said I had to operate my eye before six weeks. They Said it would cost N700,000 for the operation. I have not done the operation today thanks to alternative medicine. As for the BP medicine, I am not longer on it. “You see, part of the problem is ignorance. May people are not really aware. All they know is orthodox medicine. “I introduced a friend of mine who had eye problem to him. He stopped treatment because he did not have patience. Today, he is blind. In Alternative medicine, there is no quick fix. It is a gradual process.”  