Tributes have continued to pour in following the sudden death of Mr. Stanley Nwabia, a popular social media commentator who passed on in the early hours of Sunday in Lagos at 43. Candidate of the Social Democratic Party (SDP) in the 2019 governorship election in Lagos State, Mr. Babatunde Olalere Gbadamosi, described the late Nwabia as a warrior who fought a good fight. “So young and way too soon. You fought a good fight and you will be be remembered well. Rest in peace, soldier,” Gbadamosi wrote via his twitter handle, @BOGbadamosi. Former Minister of Education, Mrs Oby Ezekwesili in her own reaction, described Nwabia’s demise as a “terrible news. “How sad to read this terrible news of death of Mr. Stanley Nwabia. One of active handles that tag me a lot. Wow. He was so young. Life! Wow. My heart deeply goes out to his wife and children. May the Lord God give his families the deepest grace, comfort and peace possible,” Ezekwesili wrote via her handle, @obyezeks The co-leader of the Bring Back Our Girls Campaign said anyone with information about Nwabia’s family should reach out to her. “Should any of you on my Timeline have the contact information for Nwabia’s family, do kindly DM to me. His death must have been quite sudden. Wow.” In his own remarks, human rights activist, Professor Chidi Odinkalu said Nwabia stood firmly for what he believed in and would be terribly missed. “Whether or not u agreed with Mr Stanley Nwabia, you had to admire his biting wit, acid humour and wicked tongue,” Odinkalu wrote via @ChidiOdinkalu. “He was a single man wrecking squad against the mob-job of BMC ( Buhari Media Centre) and more often than not had enough artillery for the lot of them. He’ll be missed. #RIP” Tribute have continued to pour in since Nwabia’s passing on was announced early Sunday morning. “Too young to go. I was personally inspired by this Man. May his gentle Soul continue to rest in the Bossom of the Almighty, ” wrote Babangida Dangida, @JoeBangis. Nwabia was born in Lagos to Abia State parents. He died following an unsuccessful blood transfusion procedure in Lagos family sources said. The sickness that warranted his undergoing the blood transfusion procedure could not be immediately ascertained. But some have speculated kidney failure. Mr Nwabia was popular on twitter where he tweeted via @MrStanleyNwabia amongst supporters of the Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) as he was a critic of the All Progressive Congress and President Muhammadu Buhari administration. He is survived by his wife and four young children.