The Middle Belt Forum Youth Wing has maintained that the region will “never” be part of ‘core’ Northern Nigeria, arguing that the region cannot identify with those whose major interest is to enslave its people. The Forum which stated this in a statement by its president, Emmanuel Zopmal, on Sunday, in response to Abubakar Tsav’s claim in a recent interview that Middle Belt could not be separated from the North and that Middle Belt Forum is a mere noisemaker, accused the former commissioner of police of being a betrayer who cannot speak for the Middle Belt. Zopmal insisted that, “the Middle Belt Region is never and will never be part of the North.” Related: MIDDLE BELT YOUTHS ATTACK NORTHERN GROUP OVER THREAT TO SOUTHERNERS According to him, “There is no sense in continuing being together with a people who persistently seek our total destruction and annihilation by abetting the invasion of our communities, raping our women, killing, maiming and displacing our people into Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) camps for the sole purpose of taking over our ancestral lands and enslaving our people. “In the said interview, Tsav had thrown caution to the wind and insulted the collective sensibilities of the leadership and people of the Middle Belt Region by claiming that the Middle Belt cannot be separated from the core North. “We are not surprised at Tsav’s position, having traced his antecedents of mental slavery to the core Northern oligarchy. Sadly, our discovery shows that Tsav rose to the position he occupied within the Police Force through such sycophancy and betrayal of his people all through. It is therefore not surprising that, even in his old age, he has demonstrated that indeed old habits never die. “Ordinarily, we would not have bothered to comment on Tsav’s baseless claims. However, for the purpose of putting the record straight, we wish to remind him that he is in the least competent to comment on the affairs of the Middle Belt as he has never at any time acknowledged himself as a member of the Forum, nor has he shown any impact or contribution towards the course of the Middle Belt struggle. “On the contrary, his posture has always been that of a spoiler and an adversarial collaborator who is always in a hurry to execute the agenda of his paymasters to the detriment of the Middle belt People. “The concept of the Middle Belt is beyond Tsav and his paymasters. After all, we have gone past this stage. To put the records straight, Tsav and his ilk should know too well that the amalgamation of 1914 only coerced ethnic nationalities of different regions into a nation called Nigeria. “Over 100 years after, it is clear that this unity must be renegotiated for us to appreciate and mutually respect our diversities where justice, equity and fairness will be upheld or we go our separate ways. Tsav is too small to wish for a forced union that is hinged on abuse and illegality.”