Prominent traditional rulers in Yewa land in Ogun State have commended Aliko Dangote for establishing one of the biggest cement plants in the area; thus bringing development and economic emancipation to the people in the grassroots in the area.
The commendation came during the commissioning of several projects constructed by Dangote Cement Plc, Ibese for its 14 host communities as part of its Corporate Social Responsibility activities (CSR).
The commissioning was followed by the award of scholarships to 115 deserving host communities’ pupils and students in primary, secondary, and higher institutions across the country.
Some of the projects commissioned by the Cement Plant Director, Azad Nawabuddin, amidst singing and dancing by the locals, included Blocks of classrooms, Transformers, Health centre, Water projects, flood channels, boreholes, among others that spread across the host communities.
Extolling the virtues of the public spirit of Aliko Dangote, on behalf of the Olu of Aga Olowo, Oba Kayode Adio Kusoro and Olu of Onigbedu, Oba Mathew Ajibulu, the Olu of Imashayi, Oba Gbadebo Oni said the communities were lucky to be beneficiaries of Dangote’s large heart.
He described the siting of Dangote Cement plant in the area as a blessing and that through various CSR projects done by the Company, the communities, which are rural, are now having facilities which were otherwise unattainable if not for the presence of Dangote Cement.
The monarch said the host communities are happy with the company’s handling of community issues, saying that Aliko Dangote deserves all the cooperation the entire Yewa land could muster for establishing the cement plant in their land and also taking care of the people and the communities.
He promised that his people would continue to give peace a chance always, because to whom much is given, much is expected. The monarch said the scholarship is the best thing that has happened to the host communities because the issue of quality education cannot be quantified in monetary terms.
The scholarship, according to him, has offered a big relief to parents who have to struggle every time to ensure that their children’s school fees are paid, saying that they would forever be grateful to the management of the company.
The Plant Director, while presenting the scholarship to some of the awardees, said the scholarship has become an annual event meant to contribute to the educational development of the people in the area and to position them in right place in the scheme of things in Ogun State and Nigeria in general.
Nawabuddin urged the awardees to reciprocate the company’s gesture by facing their education squarely and shunning vices that could negatively affect them. He added that the beneficiaries were carefully selected to reflect the composition of the 14 host communities by involving the community leaders in the entire process.