Ayuba Wabba has been reelected unopposed as President,  Nigeria Labour Congress (NLC) for the next four years at its 12th Quadrennial National Delegates Conference.
Deputy Presidents were Amaechi Asugwuni, Muhammad Nadir Idris and Najim Usman Yasin, wele also elected, while Ibrahim Khaleel was elected National Treasurer.
Four persons elected Vice-Presidents were Abdrafiu Adeniji, Peters Adeyemi, Lawrence Amaechi and Oyelakan Lateef, who was returned unopposed.
Other officials elected include, Marven Adamu, National Financial Secretary and Adewale Adeyanju, National Trustee, among others.
In his acceptance speech, Wabba said the next level would be to ensure the implementation of the new minimum wage by federal and state governments, urging the state councils to be ready for the battle for the implementation without retrenchment.
Wabba promised that the Labour movement would continue to take instructions from the rank and files and would always speak truth to the powers to protect the interests of the working class.
He said: “We will dedicate ourselves to ensure that the challenges workers face are confronted headlong. Workers are treated as slaves while those that don’t even work hard take higher pay.”
According to him, Wabba the new leadership must build workers the power to be able to change the equation and must confront the political power to ensure that workers live decent lives.
The NLC President, “The new leadership of NLC will respect the will of members and consolidate on what we are doing. We will continue to conform to the tradition of the union and speak the truth to those in power. The daily challenges of workers at workplaces will be confronted. We have been able to work assiduously in the past four years and we will move forward to build workers poser. I assure our members of our commitment and dedication to the resolutions of the conference.”
While calling on the political class to imitate the rancour-free of the NLC, Wabba said: “We can hold election without rancour if the interest is truly to serve the people of the country,” adding that it was important to address the global in balance where more people live below poverty line despite the growing global wealth. © 2019, Hallmarknews. All rights reserved. Reference and link to this site is required if you wish to reuse any article. comments and opinions