The Presidency clarified on Tuesday that the National Livestock Transformation Plan of the Federal Government was not suspended. The Senior Policy Adviser (Agriculture Interventions Coordination) in the Office of the Vice President, Dr. Andrew Kwasari, stated this in an interview with journalists in Abuja during a training session organised for the executives of Miyetti Allah Cattle Breeders Association of Nigeria and its officers in eight states considered to be flashpoints. The training programme was jointly organised by the Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue and had its theme: “Dialogue and Negotiations: Why, when and how to be effective.” “The National Livestock Transformation Plan has not been suspended. In fact, it has been enhanced because Mr President, in his wisdom, has spoken and directed that this is the plan that we should be working around to implement,” Kwasari said. “We will need all-encompassing committee of the National Economic Council, National Food Security Council, and the Federal Executive Council working together to deliver this plan. So, for us, this is the type of leadership that the country needs. So, there is no mention of suspension whatsoever for the NLTP.” He advised Nigerians not to worry about the 30 days ultimatum given by the Coalition of Northern Groups over the Ruga settlement project, asking the group to respect the office of the President which, according to it, took the decision in the interest of the nation. “I think the President has the overwhelming support and his decision has resonated with the majority. I think we should not worry about the threats. They don’t earn my respect in anyway, I can’t support them. My support is for the President and the people of Nigeria,” he said. “Their threat is divisive, I think these people should listen to the majority of this country and above all, accord respect to the office of the President, if they are true citizens of this country. “The President took the decision to suspend the Ruga policy in the interest and common good of all Nigerians. Are we supposed to be concerned about rallying around the President who has taken a decision or a portion of society that feels otherwise for whatsoever reason? I don’t know whatever evidence that they have.” Kwasari said he would not demand the arrest of the CNG leaders as according him, the security architecture of the country had taken a strong stance against hate speech and divisive rhetoric. “So, I’m sure that the appropriate age cues are considering whatever action they will take. What is within my power is to make sure that the President’s directive is obeyed”, he stated. In his own remarks, the Country Manager of CHD, Babatunde Afolabi, said the 18 MACBAN leaders were chosen from seven frontline states and Katsina and that the training was to build capacity of stakeholders considered pivotal to peace. “The training was informed by the need to build the capacity of the stakeholders that we consider to be pivotal in the peace process in Benue and Nasarawa states. “If you are going to mediate in these two states in the farmers-herders crisis, then you should be talking to MACBAN and All Farmers’ Association with a view to building and enhancing their capacity on mediation and dialogue.” The National Secretary of MACBAN, Baba Othman Ngelzarma, told journalists that “by training them, their capacity to mitigate crisis will be thorough. The training is timely because peace building is essential.” “Peace is very essential in the communal peace and dialogue plan. There has to be initiative that will bring about understanding among communities, most importantly among the pastoral communities and other communities in the country. What is missing now is the peace that had existed in the past between the pastoralists and the communities across the nation.”