Yoruba Youths under the auspices of Yoruba Council of Youths Worldwide (YCYW) has condemned in strong terms, the killing of 58-year-old Mrs. Funke Olakunrin-Fasoranti, daughter of Afenifere leader, Pa Reuben Fasoranti by suspected Fulani herdsmen, describing it as one murder too many in Yoruba land. The group regretted that herdsmen have continued to wreak havoc in Yoruba land, but vowed that the killing of Mrs. Olakunrin-Fasoranti meant that they have crossed the red line and must therefore leave Yoruba land. It called for mass protests to drive home the demand. “The leadership of the Yoruba Council of Youth Worldwide, being the umbrella body of all Yoruba indigenous youths joins millions of great sons and daughters of Oduduwa to condemn the merciless road attack and gruesome killing of Mrs. Funke Olakunrin, 58 year -old daughter of Afenifere leader, Pa. Reuben Fasoranti, by suspected Armed Terrorists Fulani Herdsmen, near Ore junction, as she was reported to be on her way from Akure, Ondo State where she had gone to visit her father,” the group said in a statement by its president, Aremo Oladotun Hassan. “We see this, out of many outrageous provocations, as a climax. They have pierced a sword of terror in our hearts. But we are putting it on record that enough is enough, let the armed bandits terrorists not know sleep henceforth.” The group said the killing was “crossing the red line of our patience, enduring pains and agony, considering the monumental disaster and casualties this singular death of Mrs Olakunrin, Nee Fasoranti, an erudite lawyer and accomplished accountant of great repute, the pride daughter of a maverick legend of the Yoruba nation, Pa Fasoranti, will cost the nation.” “We see this draconian killings, as their trademark of terrorism: kidnapping, genocidal mass killings, ritualism by the Fulani herdsmen and their cohorts, which has become one too many reoccurring evil decimal, and totally unacceptable and unpardonable. “This deliberate heinous unprovoked, unwarranted daily killings of innocent Nigerians across the nation should not be tolerated, we condemn it in its entirety.” “We foresee danger in the coming days, for this is a prove of that the terrorists are fully operational and ready to dare the consequences of their actions this time around, having resisted all entrities of peace and vacation warnings to leave the South West.” The group noted that the fact that President Muhammadu Buhari led government has failed to tackle the herdsmen crisis, but is instead promoting Ruga, is an indication that it is complicit in the killings. “This is a grave danger to our already fragile unity. The Federal Govenment has failed to live up to its constitutional responsibilities of protection and adequate welfare of the Nigerian citizenry, and is instead promoting cladestinely, colonization agenda and enslavement policies in the name of RUGA, Cattle Colony, National Live Stock Reformation Projects to mention a few. This points to complicity. “We are calling out all great virile and vibrant Yoruba youths for a mass action peaceful rally across the South Western states, towards the final resistance showdown against these terrorists and criminals who have chosen the path of perdition and destruction, and we are ready to flush them out of Yoruba Land, for we know crime is crime irrespective of the perpetrators who are combined and mainly of Fulani, Igbo, Yoruba extractions, and militia mercenaries ISWA, ISIS fighters foreigners from Mali, Niger, Sudan, Algeria, Libya, Morroco to mention a few according to a kidnap victim: Dr Amusat of the OAU all trading on crime and ritualism.” The group condoled with Pa Fasoranti and family over the death, and called for “urgent implementation of the CONFAB 2014 Report and other issued white papers towards attaining a true federalism and new people’s constitution that guarantees total freedom and equitable justice. “We hope the Federal Government will urgently arrest this ugly perennial incidences and unholy trends by arresting and prosecuting the perpetrators of this crime, with a view to nipping in the bod with high intelligence, synergy with our local vigilante groups,OPC, Agbekoya under our recently proposed: Operation F’olumo(Operation Sweep Clean Our Land)- under the auspices of the Southwest Regional Joint Security Network, a special civilian joint task force with a solid advanced technological supports, funding and strategic framework, while we call on President Mohammadu Buhari to frontally address a state of the nation media briefing soon, whereas our plight and challenges would be resolved collectively and peacefully.”