Algerian authorities are sending as many as 10 chattered flights to carry additional 1,400 fans to Cairo, Egypt for the African Cup of Nations semi-final showdown against the Super Eagles of Nigeria on Sunday, the country’s state TV reported. The coach Djamel Belmadi’s team beat Ivory Coast on penalties to make it to the semis, and are now hoping to clinch their first title in nearly 30 years. The match kicks off at 8:pm. The Algerians last beat Nigeria in the final of the 1990 tournament to seal their sealed first and only continental trophy. Nigeria has had the upper hand in meetings between the two countries since then. In 2017, the Super Eagles beat Algeria 3 – 1 in Uyo to reach the 2018 World Cup. The return leg in Algeria ended one goal apiece. But Nigeria’s coach Gernot Rohr anticipates a very tough match. “They were fragile at the time,” Rohr said. “We beat them 3-1 [in 2017] and there were loads of individual mistakes. They made it easy for us. In the return match also, they were fragile. Now, they are solid.” The Algerian side was recently voted the best team in the tournament’s group stage by the tournament organisers. Algeria’s defence ministry told AFP that six additional military planes would be deployed to shuttle supporters for the final if the team progresses. A government statement said the decision was taken – with the approval of Prime Minister Noureddine Bedoui – so that “600 Algerian supporters could cheer and encourage the national team and motivate them to win this important continent trophy,” as quoted by AFP. This is not the first time Algerian authorities have arranged for the transport of their football fans. In 2009, former President Abdelaziz Bouteflika’s administration had sent several thousand Algerian fans to Sudan to watch the heated World Cup qualifiers play off between Algeria and Egypt. Meanwhile, authorities in Tunisia have also organised three planes to transport their supporters to Cairo where the Carthage Eagles will take on tournament favourites Senegal in the other semi-final according to Aljazeera.