– Nigeria leads the race in Africa 
– Low self esteem responsible for growing use – expert By FAVOUR ALILU Global Industry Analysts (GIA) has revealed that skin-whitening industry which stood at $10 billion in 2009, may become a $31.2 billion industry by the year 2024. GIA stated this in their recently published, annual global report on skin-whitening. Although skin whitening – or simply put, bleaching cream – was once illegal in Nigeria, the country has proven to as huge market for it as more Nigerians go for it, perhaps to boost their ego. A 2011 study by World Health Organisation (WHO) showed that 76 million Nigerians use skin-whitening products on a regular basis, chiefly among them is the women folk. WHO equally estimated that out of the 40 percent African Women that use skin lightening products, Nigeria leads the race, followed by Togo, with South Africa coming third. Experts reveal that the Nigerian market of skin-whitening products is fast- expanding. But what could be the cause of this alarming bleaching rate especially in Sub-Saharan Africa? Who is to blame for the recurring practice which fast becoming a societal epidemic? What should be done to tackle this menace before it becomes an uncontrollable situation? In an interview with Business Hallmark,  a dermatologist at the American Academy of Dermatology (PGD), Makanjuola Olayemi Solomon, spoke on the possible reasons for increase in the bleaching trend among Nigerians. “People with low self esteem see bleaching as a booster to try looking good and fight depression”, he said. According to him, “everyone wants to measure up and live up to the so called expectation that even an average lady can save just to procure an expensive cream in order to measure up.” He explained that fear of social inequality especially among the women folk is one of the possible reasons for the increased rise in the use of skin-whitening creams. Makanjuola revealed that unpleasant hereditary skin is one of the reasons why people will try out skin-whitening creams. “Most folks naturally don’t have a good skin but harsh skins that naturally they’ve got patches around knuckles and on their feet, so there’s an obvious need to fight this, even as the melanin fights their back,” he explained. He didn’t under-play the place of skin irritations in being one of the major reasons for the rising use of skin-whitening creams. Makanjuola also referenced the place of marks of injuries that stay for long even after childhood plays and how individuals use skin-whitening creams to clear those spots. He however emphasised on the need for adequate sensitization by government, NGOs and educational bodies. He decried the shallow understanding of the effects of using skin-whitening creams especially among youths. He advised Nigerian citizens not to forget the place of a dermatologist when choosing and using skin products, as there are varieties of skin products for different skin types. ‘It may interest you to know that skin-whitening is the use of cosmetics, drugs or any other chemical product to make one’s skin tone whiter or lighter. It is alternatively called skin-lightening or skin-bleaching. Over the years, skin whitening products has evolved, it all started with creams and soaps, however, the advent of injectables and drugs has given this business a new turn. “Men and women from all walks of life could get their skin whitened without using any cream or soap. It is also very important to note the growing trend of skin bleaching among pregnant women who bleach the skin of their babies from the womb. “Another interesting fact to note is that skin-whitening started as a practice among the whites. In the Victorian era, purity was largely attributed to being white and European women were known for applying lead paint on their faces to increase their whiteness. “Consequently, the practice grew further to become a trade, after the colonisation era and further spread of white ideologies into Africa. Following the promotion of this idea, the market grew exponentially to become the multi-billion dollar industry that we see today.”