National leader of the All Progressive Congress (APC), Bola Ahmed Tinubu has said it was the destiny of Mrs. Funke Olakunrin, daughter of Afenifere leader, Pa Reuben Fasoranti who was killed by armed men along Benin-Ore Expressway on Friday to die the way she did. Tinubu who spoke to journalists after paying condolence visit to Pa Fasoranti in Ondo on Sunday, noted that nobody could have prevented her death if that was how she was destined to die. “It has been destined that that is the way she will go,” Tinubu said. “You can’t change what is ordained by God; you cannot change it. “One way or the other; it could be death by road accident or any other means… we just pray that this one will not happen again.” Asked his views on the fact that witnesses said the killers were herdsmen, Tinubu disagreed, asking whether anyone saw them with cows. “Excuse me, I am extremely concerned about security and I don’t want a stigma. I can go through the history of kidnapping and you are mature enough. We know how it started, where it all started, there are a lot of copycats,” he said. “How many years ago have we faced insecurity in this country and cases of kidnapping, is Evans who was arrested, and his disclosure, then a herdsman? I don’t want to be political. The question is ‘ where are the cows?’ ” Tinubu emphasised that his concern was security, which according to him, must be well addressed . “I am a nationalist and the security concerns and challenges right now must be faced squarely throughout Nigeria,” he noted. “The incident that affected one member of our family, Mrs Olakunrin, is saddening and unacceptable but nobody can return her alive, she has answered the call of her creator.
“We must not use this incident to divide ourselves but we must use it as a cure to the security problem by providing additional police and patrol. “We also need additional security reinforcement along Ore Road and various flash points across the country. I have discussed this with various authorities. The governor is aware and being proactive about this. “The security challenges are numerous across this country. More police are being recruited and it takes time to train and deploy them in various areas, nobody prepares more than necessary for this.”