Bidemi Mojuba who was arrested in FESTAC, Amuwo-Odofin area of Lagos State, for allegedly stabbing a lady identified as Christy, has confessed that he stabbed her due to her refusal to allow him to have sexual intercourse her. Mojuba, 26, from Kogi State confessed to interrogators while being paraded by the Lagos State Commissioner of Police, CP Zubairu Muazu, yesterday at the State Criminal Investigating Department (SCID) Panti, that the deceased did nothing to him and that he simply had the urge to kill Mojuba, a graduate of Rivers State Polytechnic, was accused of stabbing Christy to death with multiple stab wounds at his uncle’s residence at 55, Cooperation Estate, Amuwo Odofin, Lagos. While answering questions from journalists, he confessed: “I was staying with my uncle in Corporation Estate, but he was not around on the day of the incident. I have only stayed in my uncle’s place for six weeks and the victim was a prostitute that I picked from a club. “Christy is a prostitute, I picked her at the club to have nice time with her. Actually, I was already on drugs when I picked her because I am already addicted to ‘Rephenol’ drug. I belong to Viking fraternity group, which I joined in my first year at the higher institution.” On how he murdered his victim, he said: “When I took the deceased to my place, I wanted to have sex with her but she insisted that I give her money first and because of the effects of the drug that I took and the urge to have sex, I got very angry and I decided to force her and we started struggling. “The next thing I did was to pick a kitchen knife and stabbed her in the frontal part of her neck. I was not planning to kill her, actually. I used the knife to peel orange and it was on the washing machine, close to where I was sitting, I was not planning to kill her, it just happened. “After killing her, I was about to escape but unfortunately, neighbours who had already heard our argument, held me. I didn’t kill her inside the house but I stabbed her on her way out of the apartment. I was shocked when I realized she was dead. I wanted to escape from the house when I was caught by neighbours,” he said.