 Aide to former president Goodluck Jonathan, Reno Omokri has said President Muhammadu Buhari is working to divide Nigeria with his open display of bias. Omokri said this while reacting to the invitation of MASSOB leader, Ralph Uwazurike by the Department of State Services (DSS). He wondered why the security outfit would ignore leaders of the Coalition of Northern Groups who threatened Southerners living in the North with “decisive action,” but chose to invite Uwazurike for asking the Igbo to resist Ruga. “DSS invites Uwazuruike over his comments against RUGA and the Coalition of Northern Groups’ threat. Yet, the same DSS did NOT invite the Coalition of Northern Groups who threatened Southerners with “decisive action”. General Muhammadu Buhari will DIVIDE Nigeria,” Omokri wrote in twitter. The DSS had yesterday, on Wednesday, invited Uwazurike over a video message he released on Tuesday calling on the Igbo to resist Federal Government’s proposed Ruga settlements for Fulani herdsmen. Uwazurike, who now leads the Biafra Independent Movement (BIM) had in the video, criticised the President General of Ohanaeze Ndigbo, Dr. Nina Nwodo over his reponse to a threat by the Northern Coalition Group, saying that the Ohanaeze leader ought not be the one to reply the coalition since they did not deserve his response, while faulting World Igbo Congress position and statements on RUGA and state of the nation too. The Coalition of Northern Groups had in a press conference addressed by its spokesperson, Adul Aziz Sulaiman, on Wednesday last week, threatened to take action against Southerners living in the North if Southern governors did not accept Ruga within 30 days. The group also gave the President Muhammadu Buhari led Federal Government a 30-day ultimatum to reverse its suspension of Ruga. Since they issued their threat, they continue to walk free, while the presidency only asked that they be ignored. However, Uwazurike who in response to their threat, asked the Igbo worldwide to reject RUGA, while calling for a meeting of all Igbo people to help organise a formidable resistance to the proposed settlement in any part of Igbo land, was asked to appear in DSS office in Owerri on Thursday. The DSS in an SMS to Uwazurike on Wednesday said: “I’m Samson from DSS office Imo state Headquarters Owerri. You are invited to come to DSS Imo state headquarters Owerri tomorrow 11/07/2019 for a meeting with the State Director. Time 1200 hours. You can call this number if you need additional information, pls”.