All Progressives Congress (APC) leader, Bola Ahmed Tinubu has tackled those attributing the killing of Mrs. Funke Olakunrin, daughter of Afenifere leader, Pa Reuben Fasoranti to Fulani herdsmen, asking if they saw the attackers with cows. The former Lagos governor spoke on Sunday when he visited Pa Fasoranti, to commiserate with him over the death of his daughter, said he was concerned about the security challenges in the nation and asked Nigerians not to trivialize the issue of herdsmen. Tinubu, who was in the company of a first interim National Chairman of the APC and former Osun State governor, Bisi Akande, said the brutal killing of Olakunrin was sad and unacceptable. While reacting to questions about the identity of the killers, he said” “Excuse me, I am extremely concerned about security and I don’t want a stigma. I can go through the history of kidnapping and you are mature enough. We know how it started, where it all started, there are a lot of copycats,” he said. “How many years ago have we faced insecurity in this country and cases of kidnapping, is Evans who was arrested, and his disclosure, then a herdsman? I don’t want to be political. The question is ‘ where are the cows?’ ” Tinubu emphasised that he concern was security, which according to him, must be well addressed . “I am a nationalist and the security concerns and challenges right now must be faced squarely throughout Nigeria,” he noted. “The incident that affected one member of our family, Mrs Olakunrin, is saddening and unacceptable but nobody can return her alive, she has answered the call of her creator.
“We must not use this incident to divide ourselves but we must use it as a cure to the security problem by providing additional police and patrol. “We also need additional security reinforcement along Ore Road and various flash points across the country. I have discussed this with various authorities. The governor is aware and being proactive about this. “The security challenges are numerous across this country. More police are being recruited and it takes time to train and deploy them in various areas, nobody prepares more than necessary for this.”