Ondo State workers will be paid the new minimum wage as approved by law, Governor Oluwarotimi Akeredolu assured on Wednesday. He made this promise during the 2019 Workers’ Day celebration held at the Gani Fawehinmi Freedom Arcade, Akure, saying that outstanding leave bonuses would be paid soon and that workers’ welfare  was paramount to his administration. The governor said that the most effective way to ameliorate poor living conditions was the bridging of infrastructural deficit in the state.
According to him, poverty will only be tackled effectively when the hinterlands are linked to urban centres, in a design which will promote cooperation on socio-economic fronts.
“Real prosperity lies in the production of goods and services by any society.
“Our state has started the revitalization of the moribund production sector through the promising project of Ore Industrial Hub.
“Creating an atmosphere which promotes economic activities is a priority of this government. The Deep Sea Port project at Araromi will become a reality soon.
“Our state will be the desired destination for serious investors and tourists,” he said.
The governor also said that his administration would continue to treat the welfare of civil servants as a priority, and pay the new minimum wage.
“We, however, admonish our colleagues in service to reciprocate the good gestures of government, and sacrifices by those not employed by the state, to rededicate themselves and embrace best practices for progress,” he said.
Earlier, Mrs Helen Odofin, Chairperson, Trade Union Congress (TUC) in the state, urged workers to reciprocate the good gestures of employers through loyalty and commitment to quality service delivery.
She lauded the governor for promising to implement the new minimum wage.
Also, Chairman, Nigeria Labour Congress (NLC) in the state, Mr Sunday Adeleye, commended the state government for commitment to regular payment of salaries and promotion workers as and when due.
He, however, said that organised labour would constructively criticize the state government at any time, if needed.
Adeleye also urged the governor to put in place necessary machinery for the immediate implementation of the new minimum wage. (NAN)