 Former vice president and presidential candidate of the People’s Democratic Party (PDP) in the 2019 presidential election, Alhaji Atiku Abubakar; Senator representing Kaduna Central District, Shehu Sani and former president, Goodluck Jonathan, have poured eulogies on late president Umaru Musa Ya’Adua who died on May 5, 2010. Atiku described the late leader as compassionate person and prayed for the continued repose of his soul. “This day, 9 years ago, Nigeria lost a patriot and a compassionate leader in President Umaru Yar’Adua. May Allah SWT continue to shine His Noor on his face. Amin.” He posted on his Twitter handle, @atiku Senate President, Abubakar Bukola Saraki also praised the late leader, noting that his legacy will remain in the hearts of Nigerians. “Today, I remember the selfless statesman, former President Umaru Musa Yar’adua, who passed on 9-years ago. His legacy of integrity as a great leader will always remain indelible in our hearts. May the mercy of Almighty Allah (SWT) continue to be upon him. Amin.” Senator Sani in his own remark, said Ya’Adua was a true democrat and respecter of rule of law. “President Umaru Musa Yar’adua died on this day nine years ago.He was a honest man, a true democrat, respecter of the rule of law and a humble visionary.May Allah forgive his soul and grant him Aljanna Firdausi.” Earlier former President Goodluck Jonathan praised Ya’Adua, his predecessor, as a selfless leader who placed national interest above personal and ethnic gains, noting that the late president was a true man of integrity with a humble spirit. “On this day nine years ago I lost a friend, colleague, brother, and boss, President Umaru Musa Yar’Adua. He was a selfless leader who placed national interest above personal and ethnic gains,” he posted on his Twitter handle @GEJonathan “President Yar’Adua was a man of integrity with a humble spirit who always took upon himself the burden of national reconciliation, peace-building, and democratic consolidation. “He used the opportunity he had in public service to build bridges of love, foster unity and give hope to Nigerians. “Today, I remember and celebrate him for the works that he had done. Peace he lived for and homes of peace he built. Democracy he loved and democracy he nurtured. We will always remember you for your service. A servant leader truly you remain.”