Lawyer and President emeritus of Igbo think tank group, Aka Ikenga, Chief Goddy Uwazurike, KSM, has hit back at Second Republic lawmaker, Dr. Junaid Mohammed, describing him as a politically washed up person looking to use insults on Ndigbo to regain relevance. Junaid had in a recent remark, claimed that the President-general of Ohanaeze Ndigbo, Dr. Nnia Nwodo once knelt down to beg them to become president, while pouring vituperations on the Igbo. He had also said that he would prefer to have Bola Ahmed Tinubu, former Lagos State governor as president of Nigeria rather than any Igbo person. However, in a statement on Thursday, Uwazurike who, like Junaid, was a delegate in the 2014 National Conference, dismissed the claims as outright falsehood. He wandered if the former lawmaker was ever a kingmaker or a prophet to warrant Dr. Nwodo coming to beg him to become president. “Dr Junaid Mohammed, my colleague at the National Conference of Nigeria 2014 and a former follower of the Aminu Kano school of thought, has once again demonstrated why he is referred to as a former follower of Mallam Aminu Kano,” Uwazurike said. “His penchant for saying anything that will give him publicity is well known. Dr Junaid has launched a barrage of attacks on Ndigbo in several publications as if he is at war with Ndigbo. He is not a presidential material neither is he a stakeholder in the affairs of Nigeria. “The latest attacks are against Ndigbo in general and the President of Ohanaeze Ndigbo in particular, stating that Ohanaeze President knelt down before him and some unknown persons is a product of a convoluted mind!” “Is Dr Junaid Mohammed a kingmaker? Is he also among the prophets?” Uwazurike accused the former lawmaker of doing a hatchet job for those whose intention is to keep power for the next 100 years by pulling Ndigbo down and trying to set the Igbo and the Yoruba up for collision. “Dr Nnia Nwodo was a minister when Dr Junaid Mohammed became a legislator for three months before General Mohammadu Buhari overthrew Shagari government. He then went back to school to read Law as a 2nd degree. He became a minister again in 1998. Today, by the grace of God he is the President General of Ohanaeze Ndigbo worldwide,” he said. “He did not kneel down before anybody to get the position he was in. If he wants to contest for the presidency of this country, he knows what to do and going to politically washed-out persons will not be part of it. “Of late Dr Junaid Mohammed grabbed national attention when he exposed the parochial nature of the PMB government. But lately, he has been silent. Has the parochiallism ended? “Dr Junaid and his associates, including the disgraced VC who explained after the Ahmadu Bello University tragedy years ago, that ONLY 4 STUDENTS DIED, have been very histerical in pulling down the image of Ndigbo. We have no doubt that they are doing a hatchet job. “Only gullible people believe your campaign of calumny and of course the cabal that wants to rule Nigeria for 100 years. The recent attempts at pitching Igbo and Yoruba people against each other will fail because that method of propaganda is already hackneyed! “For Dr Junaid, you and your group have received your 15 minutes in the sun. You can go back to oblivion until the next hatchet job comes up.”