The All Progressive Grand Alliance (APGA) disciplinary committee investigating allegations of corrupt enrichment, extortion and violation of party constitution as it relates to the party’s 2018 primary elections, has summoned its National Chairman, Chief Victor Ike Oye to appear before it on October 12, 2019. The committee in the letter of summon titled: “Notification of Gross Misconduct,” dated October 3, 2019 and signed by its secretary, Barr Sunny Obimba, said it wants to National Chairman to answer to the allegation that he “fraudulently” obtained money from Chief Okey Ezeh, Chief Stanley Amuchie, Chief and Dr Ikedi Ohakim running into millions of naira without due authorisation of the party, among others. The summon reads: “Take notice that pursuant to Article 22(3)(c). & (d) of the APGA Constitution 2014 (As Amended) I, Barr Sunny Obimba, the Secretary of the APGA Disciplinary Committee do hereby serve upon you Mr. Victor Ike Oye the notice of allegations of Gross Misconduct and abuse of office preferred against you under the hands of all the members of APGA Disciplinary Committee the details of which are as stated below: 1) That you allegedly, obtained money fraudulently from Chief Okey Ezeh, Chief Stanley Amuchie, Chief Dr Ikedi Ohakim running into millions of naira without due authorisation of the party. 2) That you allegedly, obtained property by false pretence to wit-collected Toyota Jeep from Bar Humphrey Anumodu under the pretext that it was a birthday gift which later turned out to be a farce that has caused the party an embarrassment of the highest order. 3) That you allegedly, and unilaterally aborted the Imo State governorship primary elections in Imo for selfish reasons against the party’s decision to have given the ticket to Chief Senator Ifeanyi Ararume as if it was a case of the highest bidder. 4) That you allegedly, and unilaterally aborted delegates’ primary elections in IMO, despite that all delegates aspirants went through the eyes of the needle to pay for their forms, and collection of forms, and why their money were not refunded despite the failed contract. 5) That you allegedly, issued double certificate of returns to candidates of Houses of Assembly, Reps, & Senate, which is against the extant INEC and APGA party Constitution and guidelines. 6) That you allegedly and unilaterally denied the APGA preferred governorship candidate of Enugu state, and given the ticket to the loser of the primary election. 7) That you allegedly, denied the party tickets to candidates who won the primary elections to some of your preferred persons in Anambra State against the interest of the party APGA. 8) That you allegedly, and unilaterally and illegally sacked most APGA Party state chairmen in the various states towards the built up of the purported convention of Awka. 9) That you allegedly attempted to truncate the constitution of the party, towards the purported dissolution of the BOT, and the resultant subsequent crisis that ensued as a result of your conduct. 10) That you allegedly, used Thugs, Cultist in the National Secretariat, at the venue of the purported NEC meeting, and the purported Convention of 31st May, 2019 to scare and disperse some party members that you felt are not loyal to you. 11) That you allegedly, flagrantly and incessantly abused the principles of rule of law grossly disobeyed and flaunted court orders. 12) That you allegedly, have been involved in financial scandal, recklessness and you could not account for the money that has accrued to the party since inception of your leadership. Further take notice that the above enumerated allegations if proved, your public and private conduct tends to bring the image of the party into public disrepute and/or ridicule and which conduct contravenes the provisions of Articles 21(1) (f) (k) (m) & (q) and 22(1)(b) & (2)(d) and punishable Under Article 22(4). TAKE further Notice that you are by this notice given seven (7) days to respond to these allegations and you are entitled to defend yourself in person or by a legal representative of your choice at: Venue: Beverly Hills Hotel & Suites, Aminu Kanu Crescent, Wuse II, FCT, Abuja.
Time: 10.00 am prompt.
Date: Saturday, 12th October, 2019. Dated this 3rd day of October, 2019.
Signed:
DC Secretary.