Innoson Vehicle Manufacturing Company has refuted claims that it is being pressured to relocate to either Kaduna or Lagos State or risk its license being withdrawn. In a statement, Tuesday by Cornel Osigwe, Head Corporate Communications, Innoson Group, the company described the speculation as the handiwork of mischief makers and asked the public to disregard it. “We have been constrained to issue this statement in reference to the above statement credited to the person of the Chairman of Innoson Vehicles Chief Dr Innocent Chukwuma OFR,” the statement read. “Ordinarily we would have ignored the statement and the publication in its entirety which appears to have gone viral in most social media platforms, knowing fully well that this is the handwork of mischief makers, but in a nation where silence may be seen as admission of the truth, we have been constrained to come out to officially ask the public to disregard it and set the record straight. “1. There has never been any order and there will never be any order either from the Federal Government or its agencies to Innoson Vehicles to relocate his Vehicle Manufacturing Plant which is based in Nnewi to Lagos, Kaduna or any other place. “2. Innoson Vehicles has continually maintained a robust relationship with the Federal Government specifically under the administration of President Muhammadu Buhari GCFR. For example, under this present administration, Nnewi Auto-Industrial Park was initiated to support automobile parts manufacturing companies to come together and deliver support services, vehicle components, and raw materials required by the teeming automobile manufacturing companies in Nigeria. A major beneficially of this initiative is Innoson Vehicle Manufacturing. “3. In a recent press briefing to journalist’s, which was widely publicized across many media organizations, the Chairman of Innoson Group stated clearly that Innoson Vehicles “has enjoyed huge patronage and support from the President Muhammadu Buhari-led administration”. “Furthermore, Innoson Vehicles has continually enjoyed patronage from the Federal Government and its agencies; specifically, The Nigerian Military, The Police Force, Federal Road Safety Commission, Fire Service, Immigration and lots more. “4. Innoson Vehicles is in partnership with the Nigerian Air Force for the development and promotion of joint activities to sustain the maintenance of the Nigerian Air Force Air Assets and other associated Aerospace Ground Equipment (AGE) to enable the Nigerian Air Force to continuously carry out its constitutional obligations to the Nation. “Equally it is also in collaboration with the Nigerian Army Authority for the local manufacture and supply of Armoured and Bullet-Proof Vehicles. “5. We therefore urge the general public to disregard the fallacious publication in its entirety as there is no element of truth therein.”