GalaxyBackbone’s tier III data centre cater for the needs of private and public sectors of the country’s economy, the agency’s Managing Director, Arch. Yusuf Kazaure, has said. Kazaure spoke in Abuja when the Executive Vice Chairman of Nigerian Communications Commission (NCC), Prof Umar Garba Danbatta and some senior management staff of the commission paid a working visit to the agency data centre. He said Galaxybackbone’s data centre is one of the best in the country and it provides services for all the government agencies across the country. According to him, the centre has been helping immensely in the FG’s e-government process. In his response, the Prof Danbatta described the data centre is a national asset of significant proportion. “It’s very pleasing to see an agency of government competing with some of the best service providers in the sector, it doesn’t happen like this normally, this is credit to your CEO and his team. “We will continue to patronise Galaxy in the strength of sheer quality of service. We commend you in the area of complementing what NCC is doing in the area of broadband penetration this has lessened our work. You have laid total fibres of 3,000-4,000km, the figure of 42,000km that we give from time to time is including the component of fibre that Galaxy bone has laid.’’ Meanwhile, the low biosafety awareness and practices in the country are having negative effects on health care, agriculture, environment and other sectors of the country. Experts under the aegis of the Nigerian Biological Safety Association (NiBSA) made the disclosure in a statement signed by the association’s spokesman, Jack Lampang Abia in Abuja. The association said humans, animals, forests, scientists, researchers, and even the climate were also bearing the brunt of the poor knowledge and practices, adding that the fragility of communities to new bio-risk was worrisome not only to researchers but the entire global science community. Biosafety, also known as biosecurity, involves safety measures to prevent personal, laboratory and environmental exposure to potentially infectious agents or biohazards.  