Cellulant has re-launched its payment, agent &mobile banking app Tingg to an all-in-one, multi-functional consumer super app. The new Tingg is set to include a wide array of payment, commerce, and financial services in a single platform that will change the way customers interact with digital payment services in the continent. Tingg is Cellulant’s solution to the fragmentation in the African digital payments space, particularly in cross-border payments, which supports payments, financial services and commerce at a local level, Tingg seeks to eliminate boundaries across channels and geographies. The all-in-one app will offer an integrated and efficient user experience adapted to local contexts, making it easier for customers and businesses to access digital financial services, send and accept payments conveniently. In Nigeria, with over 25,000 agents spread across 24 states, Tingg has the simple promise of bringing financial services closer to users’ doorstep. “It has always been part of our vision to unite Africa through payment, and we are excited as we start this new journey. Our experience with driving financial inclusion in the rural has equipped us to scale our proposition of taking not just financial services but commerce as well to everyone across the country through a single platform,” said Lanre Adelanwa, CMO, Cellulant Nigeria Globally, Cellulant’s digital payment infrastructure connects consumers and businesses to over 120 banks, 40 mobile network operators in one comprehensive network which allows for interoperability that has eluded numerous players in the payments space. This sets Tingg on the path to accelerate Africa’s digital transformation by connecting consumers and businesses to a simple, fast and secure financial services experience. Bolaji Akinboro, co-founder, Cellulant also noted, “Currently, Africa moves more money on mobile phones than any other economy in the world and has a growing interest in digital financial solutions. Our team believes that this gives our region the unique opportunity to lead the way in developing robust financial platforms that can be customized to the needs in each country or locality while infusing cutting-edge technologies such as Blockchain, Artificial Intelligence, and Augmented Reality.”