Preparation for this year’s Business Hallmark People of the Year Award billed to hold on November 10 at the Civic Centre, Victoria Island, Lagos has hit top gear, Chairman of its Advisory Board, Professor George Obiozor has hinted. The event is in continuation of the newspaper’s tradition of recognising and honouring outstanding individuals and institutions who have affected the national development in productive ways. As is the tradition, the 2019 edition will witness celebration of individuals and institutions that have made marks in national life in the course of the year. On the whole, there would be 12 recipients of awards in different categories. Anambra State governor, Chief Willie Obiano will take home the Hallmark Man of the Year accolade in recognition, according to a letter by Prof. Obiozor and member of Hallmark Advisory Board, Akogun Tola Adeniyi, of his “giant strides in transforming Anambra State into a major investment hub. Similarly, the Group Managing Director of United Bank for Africa (UBA), Kennedy Uzoka will take home the Banker of the Year Award in “recognition of the consistent performance” of his led management team of UBA Plc in “setting a track record of profitability and wealth creation across its operations in the African continent,” while UBA will take Bank of the Year accolade. Chairman of Nigerians in Diaspora Commission and Senior Special Adviser to President Muhammadu Buhari on Diaspora, Mrs. Abike Dabiri-Erewa will take home the Public Servant of the Year Award in recognition of her “dogged and relentless fights to ensure that the interests of Diaspora Nigerians are always protected.” The Parastatal of the Year Award will go to the Nigerian Maritime Administration and Safety Agency (NIMASA) for its accomplishments since Mr. Dakuku Peterside took office as Managing Director. Also on the list of awardees are Mrs. Folake Ani-Mummuney who got Professional Excellence Award in Marketing and Corporate Communication; Prof. Olufemi Adelowo, Outstanding Achievements in Medical Science; H.E Betty Akeredolu, Outstanding Community Service and Chief (Dr.) Sam Onyishi, CEO of Peace Mass Transit Limited for Business Integrity. Others are Fidelity Bank Plc., Special Product Award; Captain Wells Okunbo, Business Personality of the Year; Chief Mike Ozekhome SAN, Professional Excellence and Mr. Jack Rich-Tein Jr., Entrepreneur of the Year. Previous winners of the award have also included former Central Bank governor, now Emir of Kano, Muhammadu Sanusi II; former Ondo State governor, Olusegun Mimiko; Central Bank Governor, Godwin Emefiele among others. “We are getting ever ready for for the event,” Prof. Obiozor said in a chat on Friday. “Of course, most things are in place and we are looking forward to having a momentous event.”