Business Hallmark Newspaper has named Anambra state governor, Wille Obiano its Man of the year, 2019. The honour to Obiano is part of the yearly activities of the Newspaper’s tradition of recognising and honouring outstanding individuals and institutions who have affected the national development in productive ways. In a letter to Gov Obiano, Chairman, Business Hallmark Advisory Board, Prof. George Obiozor said he was chosen in recognition of his developmental strides in the state. “This honour is in recognition of Your Excellency’s giant strides in transforming Anambra State into a major investment hub. We recall the immense challenges which confronted your administration at its inception, ranging from insecurity, low internally generated revenue, poor business environment, etc,” the letter read. “It is noteworthy that your Excellency has responded creatively to these challenges and has given the state an exiting new profile. Today, it is a preferred destination for direct investments, attracting multi-billion naira investments. “Indeed, it is a tribute to the improved business environment which has been underpinned by the robust programme of ensuring the safety of lives and property, embarked upon by the Obiano administration. It is also noteworthy that Anambra State recently won the Best Supporter of MSMEs at the National MSME Awards. Your Excellency has also diversified the revenue base of the state, especially by expanding the industrial base and promoting agro-business.” Prof. Obiozor praised Obiano for improving the stand of Anambra in the committee of Nigerian states, noting that it has impacted positivity on every facet of life in the state. “Findings from our team of reporters reveal that there is hardly any facet of life which your government has neglected. Most remarkably, your Excellency has maintained a very low profile despite your glittering record of achievements. Our board has no hesitation therefore in selecting you for this well merited honour. “As the governor of the leading state in the South East, home of the legendary Hon. Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, we hereby note, for the records, that Your Excellency has carried out the responsibilities of your high office with great dignity and sense of responsibility.” The award will be presented at a ceremony scheduled for Sunday, November 10, 2019. Previous winners of the prestigious Hallmark Man of the Year Award include former Central Bank governor, now Emir of Kano, Muhammadu Sanusi II; former Ondo State governor, Olusegun Mimiko; Central Bank Governor, Godwin Emefiele among others.