Former vice president and presidential candidate of the People’s Democratic Party (PDP) in the 2019 general election, Alhaji Atiku Abubakar has reacted to Wednesday’s decision of the Supreme Court which dismissed his appeal and upheld the victory of President Muhammadu Buhari at the Presidential Election Petition Tribunal. Atiku said it was now left for Nigerians to access whether justice was done or not, noting that the judgement is part of democratic challenges Nigeria must face as a nation. “It is said that the Supreme Court is not final because it is infallible, but that it is infallible because it is final,” he said in a statement. “While I believe that only God is infallible everywhere, and only Nigerians are infallible in our democracy, I must accept that the judicial route I chose to take, as a democrat, has come to a conclusion. “Whether justice was done, is left to the Nigerian people to decide. As a democrat, I fought a good fight for the Nigerian people. I will keep on fighting for Nigeria and for democracy, and also for justice. “I thank all Nigerians who have stayed the course since the commencement of trial in the petition on the February 23 presidential election. “The judgement is part of democratic challenges we must face as a nation. The Nigerian judiciary, just like every estate of our realm, has been sabotaged & undermined by an overreaching and dictatorial cabal, who have undone almost all the democratic progress the People’s Democratic Party and its administrations nurtured for sixteen years, up until 2015. “When democracy is rolled back, the economy, the society and the judiciary will not be far behind. Today, the nail has been put on the coffin and the gains we collectively made since 1999 are evaporating, and a requiem is at hand. “In a democracy, you need a strong judiciary, a free press and an impartial electoral umpire. Nigeria has none of those three elements as at today. “One man, one woman, one youth, one vote, should be the only way to make gains in a democracy. And when that is thwarted, the clock starts to tick. “Two and a half millennia ago, Sophocles said “If we are to keep our democracy, there must be one commandment: “Thou shalt not ration justice.” Nigeria will do well to observe this warning. “To those who think they have broken my spirit, I am sorry to disappoint you. I am too focused on Nigeria to think about myself. I gave up that luxury twenty years ago. The question is not if I am broken. The question is if Nigeria is whole? “This is not a time for too many words. It will suffice for me to remind Nigeria of this – we are an independent nation and we are the architects of our fate. If we do not build a free Nigeria, we may end up destroying her, and God forbid that that should be the case. “I was a democrat, I am a democrat, and I will always continue to be a democrat. May God bless Nigeria.” A Supreme Court panel led by the Chief Justice of Nigeria, Tanko Mohammed had on Wednesday, dismissed Atiku’s appeal against Buhari’s victory at the tribunal. He promised to release details of the decision subsequently.