National Chairman of the All Progressives Congress (APC), Comrade Adams Oshiomhole, has accused the opposition People’s Democratic Party (PDP) of pasting posters of himself and other members of his party for 2023 presidential campaign in order to cause disaffection in the party. The APC chairman who spoke in Abuja on Thursday at a reconciliation meeting with aggrieved aspirants and stakeholders from Bayelsa State ahead of the November 16 governorship election, pointed out that only those wanting to play God would be talking about 2023 presidency at this stage. “Only those who play god can begin to position themselves now for 2023. We believe that these are the handiwork of the PDP who thinks that they can create suspicion within the rank of the APC by nominating for our party who they think or purporting or attempting to print for some elements in our party whether to create complete diversion,” he said. “So, I stand here as the National Chairman of the APC not only to deny those posters as they affect me but to deny those posters as they affect any leader of our party because it is not yet time. Even people who may have ambition are aware that this is not the time. “At this point in time, all hands must be on deck to support President Muhammadu Buhari and all our state governors in their respective states to work together unanimously to deliver deliverables for the good of our people in the states and at the federal level. This is not the time to discuss politics, politics cannot be an all round season, the season for politics is over. There is time for politicking and there is time for governance.” Oshiomhole condemned governor of Bayelsa State, Seriake Dickson for using what he called “gutter language” on the APC governorship candidate, David Lyon. “We hear that the people of Bayelsa cannot wait to get rid of the PDP in Bayelsa. When a governor describes one of his own purely on account of his political differences, using name of terrorists and such things like that, then he has missed it already. “And I can understand his fears, if people who go to borrow labels and assume that they are the leaders of the Ijaws and that they are the lions, when they see the real and authentic lion, they are sure to be afraid. “So APC rejects and condemn in strong term the raw language unbecoming of a governor, by a man I otherwise admired. The way he has described our candidate, we will not come to his own level. On this occasion, we will invoke a popular statement made by Michelle Obama at the peak of the last presidential election in US when she said, ‘When they go low, we fly high’. So when Dickson goes low, we will fly high; we will not join him in using gutter language to describe neither his office or his person, or even their candidate who is about to be defeated.”