In continuation of its tradition of honouring outstanding individuals and institutions, one of Nigeria’s leading business information providers, Business Hallmark Newspaper, has named the Group Managing Director of United Bank for Africa (UBA), Mr. Kennedy Uzoka as its Banker of the Year, 2019. In a letter to Mr. Uzoka, signed by Ambassador George Obiozor, Chairman, Business Hallmark Public Policy Forum and Akogun (Dr.) Tola Adeniyi, member of its Editorial Board, the newspaper said the choice was in “recognition of the consistent performance” of the Uzoka-led management team of UBA Plc in “setting a track record of profitability and wealth creation across its operations in the African continent.” According to the letter, “Our editorial Board was particularly impressed by the sterling performance of the bank in the international market, as one of Africas leading lenders. Your consistent promotion of financial inclusion across the African market can be rightly argued to have catalyzed action in the emergence of the African free trade agreement (AFCFTA) which was recently ratified by our country. “We also note with admiration, your successes in creating innovative financial products which broaden the traditional financial base. The UBA MarketPlace event which held in Abuja recently, has set new industry benchmarks.” Similarly, UBA Plc was also voted as Bank of the Year in what is double honour for the group. The choice of UBA, according to a similar letter by the editorial board to Mr. Tony Elumelu, the bank’s Group chairman, is informed by its remarkable exploits on the African continent where it has consolidated its position as the leading financial institution. The board noted particularly that, “It is remarkable that despite global economic challenges, you have successfully repositioned the bank as a thriving international operation, earning numerous recognitions nationally and internationally. “Our editorial Board was particularly impressed by the sterling performance of the bank in the international market, as one of Africas leading lenders. Your consistent promotion of financial inclusion across the African market can be rightly argued to have catalyzed action in the emergence of the African free trade agreement (AFCFTA) which was recently ratified by our country. “We also note with admiration, your successes in creating innovative financial products which broaden the traditional financial base. The UBA MarketPlace event which held in Abuja recently, has set new industry benchmarks.” The Hallmark board pointed out that when, 14 years ago, the new UBA was consummated and launched its ambitious Pan African drive, it was not enamoured and in fact remained quite skeptical. “But with its latest results showing the international operations grossing 38% of revenues, we admit that you have proven all the doubting Thomases wrong.”From our findings, we must say that UBAs successes have transcended its basic remit. “In fact, it has become much more than a bank. Increasingly, it is emerging as a totem of the new Africa; a resurgent continent of dynamic men and women poised to position the old continent at the centre of the new world order, even as the fourth industrial revolution dawns. “It gives us special satisfaction therefore, to celebrate this unique institution. Your success as one of Africas and indeed, the worlds eminent corporate statesmen – is yet another testament to the innate abilities of man for infinite achievements. “Obviously, it is now commonly accepted in business circles and beyond, that if you maintain this trajectory of growth, not even the sky can limit the groups inexorable rise!” Other recipients of awards in the Business category include Mrs. Folake Ani-Mummuney, winner of Professional Excellence Award in Marketing and Corporate Communications; two emerging big players in the country’s banking industry, Fidelity Bank Plc and Sterling Bank Plc, as well as Nigeria’s leading micro finance bank, LAPO MFB all of which took accolades in the Special Products Recognition category.
The award presentation is scheduled to take on Sunday November 10, 2019 in Lagos.